--- PAGE 1 ---
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval or any form without a written permission from the
authoress.

MRS. ISU, ASELA F. B.

12B, Ambassador Lane

Ogbia-Town Housing Estate

Ogbia-Town

First printed 2021

Re-printed in 2025

Contact: 07066173608

Printed by:

Kadmon Printing Company Ltd.

#304 Melford Okilo Road,

Kpansia, Yenagoa, Bayelsa State

kadmonprints@gmail.com

08036754271

l

--- PAGE 2 ---
ADIRI ORUA ONU-EMA OGBIA,
OGBIA GRAMMAR BOOK FOR BEGINNERS 1

TABLE OF CONTENT: Araraza eero ologia
Preface sete ceeeee san eeeeneeeaaeesneensseaneeseeaes Iguronadiri a.
Dedication bee eeseeeeeeeueeesseeeuenneavsnnensoness Ege adiri anye.
Acknowledgement —....sseesecesseestsesteens It6kon
National Anthem bee eeacanseneeseeseess Asuor Anaijiria
National Pledge bessueateeeseessenesteess Akubu Anaijiria
Bayelsa State Anthem ween Asuor Abayelisa
Ogbia Anthem bee ceeeseeeeeanescaneenenssesaes Asuor Ogbia
Essence of Ogbia bette eeeenteeeeatens Enai Ogbia.
CHAPTERI Onin Emu
Indigeneous Language .......cssseeee Onuema Ogbema Ogbia Language
Ogbia Orthography cee eaeneeeneeaeees Ebisidiza Ogbia
CHAPTERII WaaliEmu
Pronunciation Guide see eeeessenesesseess orua akuo ta awaani arara
Rules in written Ogbia Language........... ilogo za akuo wa ato ege onuema

Ogbia
CHAPTERIII Saari Emu
Greetings see eae eens ees aeenseeeseeneessenae Iwanan
Words and word formation... Ikpé6sinaanem enuemaitiom
Parts of Speech sedan eee eeeeneeaeessesaeeseessenaes Ekp@gi za eno-osi
CHAPTERIV Inya Emu
Simple Sentence o..eeeseecssssesseseestesteesteees Eguguru agburu-6si
Simple and Short Statement.........csse Eguguru dine ikpékpér enuosi
Questions see eea acess casaessessseaessessses Iptran
Questions and ANSWETS wsessseeeeeeee Ipuran dine idumom za
Commandsand Exclamations|.......000 Enuema za ogbini dine éégha
CHAPTER V Owu Emu
Some daily errors and correction......... Enuema ebogiani dine za iselani
FEW POEMS  orcessssssesssseeseesensessecaseneeseeseeneeasenses Waalikpu apoem
GLOSSARY Asikire-arara
OGBIA LOCAL GOVERNMENT... QOLO EDA AKOSIN OGBIA
GOVERNANCE
Counting from 11-1050... ee Awal orun agiiite ode ne diabhar
Psalm 23 sesuesusseenesuesesueaesuesneatsaeanesesnesssseess Adiri asuor a ta Adévidi, subh ne
saarilmu
The Ten Commandments ............+: Diobh ilogo za
Our Lord's Prayer  cccssssecsessessescseeseeseeseess Eghalam a owede arar
GIOTIA w.eeeeseeseessssecseesessesseesessesssenessessseaes Ibomana
The Grace weessssecsessesssesesesssesessessesaeees Obobhariera
ll

--- PAGE 3 ---
Preface..........lguronadiri a

This book is simply designed to guide the young learners of the Ogbia
kingdom to understand the Ogbia language, at their early stage of education
on sounds, and symbols, word formation, and sentences. It is planned, and
arranged in a very easy way for the learners, teachers, and parents in order to
simplify the teaching of the Ogbia language skills, by helping the pupils to
learn, identify, pronounce, and read words as well as introduce them to
questions, exclamation, and simple sentences on their own.

As Ogbia speakers we are all beginners, with respect to writing and reading
books written in Ogbia Language. We are all advice , and encouraged to feel
free, and pick acopy for our personal use.

ii

--- PAGE 4 ---
Dedication..................Ege adiri anye
This book is dedicated to Late Rev. George Igabu Amangala , the founder of
Ogbia Brotherhood,and initiator of the first albhabet, Late Chief R.O.Johnnie,
Late Barr. Cleaver Alpheus Idumesaro, Late MrSidi Olali, and Late Chief
Maclean Ngoraka Harold Dangosu- who was the fisrt person to read news in
the Ogbia language on radio Eastern region ,Enugu. Others are Late Chief M.]
Apaga, Dr. (Mrs.) Caroline Isukul, Chief. S. S. Qwede, Dr. Goodluck Ebele
Azikiwe Jonathan, who sponsored the translation of the Bible in Ogbia
Language, Elder Endure H. Fisei, Sir. Basene F. O. Amangoli, Chief, Anyan Adiki
[Okporokporo], Lay Reader Egberi Benjamin, my children, grandchildren,
great grandchildren, great great-grand children, and all the agitators for the
restoration of Indigenous (Ogbia) Language.
iv

--- PAGE 5 ---
Acknowledgement.............[tokon
In course of the production of this work, I put forward my unreserved thanks
to God Almighty, who choosed a nobody like me to propagate His ministry all
over the importance of indigenous languages(Ogbia Language) to the Ogbia
man, HRH King A. J. Turner for boosting my vision. My cybercafé operator and
his beautiful wife, Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Bra-ebide Oyabrade, who were always
available for me in the morning, noonday and night, and my foster son, Master
Lucky Peace Ekima , for making sure my desired aim is achieved, with
respect to their computer skill and to Professor Teddy Adias, Vice Chancellor
Federal University Otuoke; for creating the centre for Niger Delta Studies and
Sustainability (CNDS) during his tenure, and employing me as a part-time
lecturer in Ogbia language. Finally, I extend my appreciation to my husband,
Pastor Benjamin Isu for his understanding. Silver and Gold have I none, but
my prayer is for God to bless you all. Amen.
v

--- PAGE 6 ---
THE NATIONAL ANTHEM / ASUOR AANAIJIRIA ASUORA OBHAN OGBIA
see oe ‘ ; (OGBIA ANTHEM)
1. Anaiji-ria, owa abaima,
Obébi obhan arar 1. Qgbiakinaas6 eriaabhar
Abébe aaro aka enléma za Ogbia na aso etaria bén
Ologi etarfa aari wa era Ogbia ososi epén-adién
Kaka Anajjiria wa dadGmom Ogbia osésiekpkuputian
Agiri anyé obhan arar Aari ine agiri obo
Pe aari wa iteabai
2. Ikpéowtarar peigbon-a Ogbia na aso etaria ben.
Ba adégi asé na aar6
Egidbu dine iténéghoi 2. Kdosibeamine onumomana
Wa aaro odianyéa Biisidaoninema
Di kaka atar anwiza atar Ogbia osési epén-adfén
Ikpoowu da ebal ni Ogbia ososi ekpukpuan
Aartine agiri obo
3. Aziba onémoném-a Peaari wa iteabal
Da eghalam arar abhi Ogbianaaso etaria ben.
Lago anye adri, ako aarita lo,
Obhan da etaria 3. Ogbianaaso adégianwuinom
Boké eltian, égiobu ne amaalala Dita aasu obhan a adonomon
Wa atéiny Anaijiria Ogbia anwt owa nwt enéma
Esia obhan aaaroa, adébh atén
Aari waitee abai 2x
ASUOR ABAYELISA Aziba na anye aari eluian
LET THERE BE LIGHT [GEN'1;3]
Atukpa aaro
Enu-osi za ta—Aziba, THE MYSTERY OF PRAISE (PSALM 149)
ebebeiny a ne ozim oghon, ESSENCE OF OGBIA (ENAI OGBIA)
bene abhulu adua, an , \
adon ologi iiyi za, 1. Qgbi...a,aari wa adon 2x
ne atukpa a de etaria, Ekpar do oni, inési ag6r6man aari
ologi obhan Aba-yelisa, Ogbi...,aari wa adon
egiobu aaro.
adon ologi iiyi za, 2. Itié ta aadi Onin 2x
ne atukpa a obobharier Esi 6didnin aaroni, pe eluan za kpa fila
ologi obhan Aba-yelisa ftié ta Aadi 6nin
atukpa aaro
3. Azibaanyéaarieldan 2x
fbainyigi elvan, zita azige eségbora
THE NATIONAL PLEDGE Aziba anye aari elian.
ALOONU ANAJJIRIA
Mi aloonu anye obhan Anaijiria
Akuo mi ta abana idumom,
odebhemanobu ,dine asi adegi a.
Akuo mi ta abhi kaka emi amini,
Agiri anye Anaijiria,
Akuo Obhan a ta adionin,
Dine akuo mi ta assaama ,
Adien Anaijiria agioman anyu
Aarobape, Aziba, laguo anye am
vi

--- PAGE 7 ---
CHAPTERI ONIN EMU
INDIGENEOUS LANGUAGE QNU-EMA OGBEMA
Indigenous Language can be described as a language that is native to the region and spoken
by its indigenous people or by a particular group that is not learnt, but acquired through
imitation, repetition and correction by parents, siblings, extended family members and the
environment. It can also be refered to as Mother Tongue or home language because, it is the
language of the family you grow up in and learnt at home as achild, and still understands by
the person anytime it is in use. It is as old as creation because, it is the spoken language
given to every group by God Almighty as recorded in Gen 11;1-9, and serve as a guide to the
written form of languages.
Objective of Indigenous Language - Oodianye OQnuema Ogbema
There is need to salvage both oracy (spoken form), and literacy (written form). Itis through
literacy that we can write our literature, document, and preserve our cultural heritage,
folktales, folklores, idioms, oral traditions, proverbs, legends, peculiar expressions
associated with rituals and stories that teach moral values as part of our cultural heritage
(Ejele 1999, 2003). Saving endangered languages involves arousing interest in speakers of
a given language to take pride in their language, and desire to preserve it by getting the
younger generation to use it (Bamgbose 2007:4).
All we are saying is that, no language should die without the owners putting up a fight to
restore it. When all efforts fail, it is hoped that before it's final disappearance, the
endangered language can at least be documented for record purposes so that generations
to come will know that their language once existed.
Importance of Indigenous Language - AleibharaQnuema Ogbema
Indigenous languages play an essential role in defining indigenous relationships with
Mother Tongue identification, preserving indigenous culture and transmition of culture
from one generation to another. The importance includes:
1) It makes you understand your identity and culture because of its connection to
languages and appreciate the diversity of other cultures.
2) It is the foundation for learning other languages, for instance the letter a in English
language has two sounds in Ogbia language a and a. With these sounds already existing in
Indigenous languages due to similarities, it gives room to quick pronounciation of words.
3) It allows you to communicate freely with your family and community members who
may not be able to speak other languages.
4) It can give you a competitive edge in the job market and admission in schools.
5) Itis asource of pride and a connection to their culture and heritage.
Importance of Indigenous Language in Education
What is Indigenous Language in Education?
Indigenous Language in education referes to when a school or educational institution
integrates the language a child is not familiar with (their indigenous language) into the
classroom lesson along with the school lesson (such as English) in order to help them learn.
The importance ofindigenous language to education includes:
1) The development of the Childs personal, social, and cultural identity or background
due to increase in migration caused by unemployment, jobplacement, trade ,intra-
1

--- PAGE 8 ---
marriages, wars e.t.c.
2) It helps a child to develop their critical thinking, literacy and skills as well as create
strong root and emotions of people with positive attitude towards their own language and
cultural heritage.
3) It fosters mutual understanding and respect for one another and helps preserve the
wealth of cultural, and traditional heritage that is embedded in every language around the
world.
4) The children enjoy school more, and feel at home being surrounded by pupils,and
teachers speaking a familiar language ,and as such have confident of themselves.
5) Creates equal job opportunities in different countries of the world, and as such
create chances to be familiar with other cultures.
6) It is essential for people to present and cherish their native language as it is a vital
ORTHOGRAPHY - Ebisidiza Ogbia
This is a spelling system or a writing system of a people which include the symbols to
represent sounds accurately, and conventions or guides for writing a language. A practical
orthography helps to preserve a language,and allows it's use in education, media ,and daily
communication. Our main objective of orthography is to understand and practice the
standandized writing systems because, it is the owners of the languages that are the direct
beneficiaries who have a lot to lose without the written form of language. The first
orthography of Ogbia was proposed by H.R.M Late Rev. Amangala, George Igabu , from
Oloibiri Community, in the early 1940,as a result of his early attainment of Western
Education due to the interraction between his father, Chief Amangala Apata, and the white
men (The Colonial Masters).This was followed by Late R. O. Johnnie in the early 1950s as it
gave him the foundation to author his book,'The Primer’ in 1954.This was followed by Mr.
Sidi Qlali, a grade II teacher, and a native of Agholo (kolo) community, who established the
orthography based on Agholo speech sounds in 1947 with 37 symbols out of which 8 were
vowels, 20 consonants and nine digraphs ,While Barr. Cleaver Alpheus Idumesaro, was in
1971, Dr. Isukul Caroline, also keyed into the works of Olali on the Agholo [Kolo]
Orthography in 1976 .Williamson .K.in her 'Readings' came up with an orthography based
on the oloibiri dialect in 1979 , having known that oloibiri dialect was the standardized
language by the founding father's of the Ogbia Brotherhood in 1940,with thirty four
symbols out of which, 10 were vowels, 16 consonant with two special consonants, and six
digraphs but two sounds were missing. Others who also put their input were Chief, S.S.
Qwede in 2003 with 30 sounds, and symbols.
However the current orthography in the present use, was formed by the United Bible
Societies America, in affiliate with the Bible Society of Nigeria, Ogbia Branch in 2014. They
were able to come up with 36 symbols where 10 are vowels, 18 consonant, 2 special
consonants, and six digraphs. There was the inclusion of J which was initially omitted
because of the inter use with Z in the natural language, but in 2014, it was adopted at the
Niger Delta University Wilberforce Island Amassoma.The four major indigenous
languages in Bayelsa State are Ogbia, Ijon, Epie-Atissa, and Nembe.
OGBIA LANGUAGE AND PEOPLE:
This is the language that is given to the Ogbia people alongside other languages in the world
by God as recorded in Genesis 11;1-9, and spoken by the Ogbia native speakers before
colonization by the white woman. Though there are little dialectic variations, but the
people understand each other. The seven dialectic variations are Oloibiri, Qpume, Idema,
Anyama, Emeyal, Otuokpoti, and Oruma, with the Oloibiri dialect as the standard language.
2

--- PAGE 9 ---
1.5 ABrief History of Ogbia Migration

The people of Ogbia have seriously doubted its origin and this has brought about the
controversial nature of the History of Ogbia even till this present day, but the History of the
Aborigene ,and the Ogbeyan still stand (the origin of the Ogbia man by Milton Odia Okpara).
However ,Ogbia, is approximately situated between latitude 4.6000'N and 4.9000'N of the
equator, and longitude 6.3400'E and 6.3900'E. Physiographically, it lies within the
saltwater and freshwater swamp in the geomorphic units of the Niger Delta Area. Ogbia, as
a Local Government area is bound on the North by Yenagoa Local Government Area, on the
west by Southern Ijaw Local Government Area, on the South by Nembe Local Government
Area, and on the East by Abua-Odual Local Government Area of Rivers State. Itis located on
the bank of Rivers Ecole, tributary of the River Niger, and a number of creeks which open up
into the Atlanic Ocean including the famous Kolo Creek. Its vegetation type is the tropical
rain forest which defines its swampy topography. Flooding, erosion and water pollution as
well as oil spillage, are the major environmental problems faced by most communities in
the Local Government Area especially during the wet season of the year. Itis also on record
according to the national population census result of 2022 acts, the Ogbia native speakers
is about 350,000.00 by 2022 census, and covers an area of 695 km2.

Ogbia language is a language, spoken in the Central Delta language South-South part of
Nigeria, a subgroup of East Benue-Congo within the Niger-Congo family tree (cf.
Williamson 1989, and Blench2000). The speakers of Central Delta languages are able to
speak one or more other languages in addition to their mother tongue hence, the Ogbia
people are also able to speak Nembe, Kugbo, Izon ,and Atissa-Epie / Biseni language. The
area is divided into three main clans namely; Oloibiri clan with 24 communities, Emeyal
clan with 12 communities ,and Anyama clan with 18 communities, and Ogbia-Town as the
political headquarters, summing up to fifty-four.

The people of Ogbia are found in two local government Areas of Bayelsa State, namely,
(Nembe ,and Ogbia), and two local Government Areas of Rivers State (Okaki, and
Abua/Odual). The speakers has seven major dialectic accents which are mutually
understood by all namely; Oloibiri, Qpume, Idema, Anyama, Kolo (Agholo), Otuokpoti, and
Orumaa. Out of these dialects, the Opume, Idema, and Kolo are similar, while Anyama, and
Otuokpoti are also alike. The Oruma is of alone variety. The traditional seat of authority is
called ‘Obanobhan'’ , while their major occupation is predominantly, farming, and fishing
ona subsistence scale. She is also involved in hunting, and crafting ,and relying on the very
rich natural resource of the region ,including the Niger Rivers, and it's attributes for their
livelihood .Their main products include plantain, sugarcane, vegetables, and tuberous
crops such as cassavas ,water yam, and cocoyam. Her means of transportation is via water
in dug-out canoes cut out from tree trunks.

Culturally, the Ogbia man is endowed with talents to hunt from trees , canes, and raffia , to
make ends meet. She also set traps, and make meshes for nets from canes, and climbers, as
well as chairs, combs, paddles, and handles for implements such as hoes ,axes, diggers, and
machetes. Presently ,due to the introduction of Western Education, technology, and
politics, many have ventured into different forms of livelihood for survival.

1.6 Linguistic classification.

Westmann (1911), was the first to deal with the Genetic classification of the Ogbia language
asa Central branch of Niger-Congo .Faraclas (1989), also classifies Ogbia as forming part of
the Central Delta, language grouped under the Delta Cross languages cluster, ultimately
governed by the East Benue-Congo within the Niger Congo family. Williamson (1989), in
the Niger-Congo languages reports, re-classifies Ogbia as a Niger-Congo language,
belonging to the Edoid language family alongside languages such as Nembe, Ibani, Okrika,

3

--- PAGE 10 ---
Kalabari, Akassa, Izon, Atissa, and Degema. Alagoa, E. J, one of the renounced experts on the
origin of the people of the Niger Delta made it clear that Ogbia, is one of the ethnic groups in
the Niger Delta that has no linguistics, cultural, and historical links with the Ijaws ,hence the
only binding force between the Ijaws, and Ogbia, is the long standing inter-tribal links in
the form of marriages, trade, and socio- political arrangements.
One significant thing about the Central Delta languages is that, they are noted to be rich in
nominal, and verbal morphologies ,thereby trying to show evidence of how prefixes, and
suffixes are used in the classification of noun and morphological marking of nominals ,as
wellas verbal categories.
However, there was scarcity of materials about the Ogbia language when compared with
neighboring languages due to lack of adequate research materials and data, occasioned by
the lack of linguistics knowledge as at the time of writing, hence it was not possible to
provide illustrative examples from the language under study to support some of the data
collected for this work. Even the limited data accessed as evidence from prominent
linguists, like Isukul (1989), and Kari (2017), was based on the Agholo dialect which is one
of the dialects among the seven dialects ,but not from the standardized Oloibiri dialect.
More details on Oloibiri accent can be attested on the orthography, and this work, since the
researcher have decided to fill the gap by sticking to itas acompetent speaker.
Below are the sounds and symbols identified in the Ogbia language by the Bible Society of
Nigeria, Ogbia Branch, Central Niger Delta Language.
The Ogbia Language is spoken by the Ogbia people of southern Nigeria, only in Ogbia local
unit area is Ogbia taken as the Headquarters. It shares boundary to Yenagoa on the North,
Nembe in the South, Southern Ijaw on the west & Ahoada west on the East.

ayo A B BB IB Ft

ID ID i= i= FF

(sr GB GH H Ii I

J K KP i= M1

INU IN| W IN WX Cc)

Oo PR SS LT UU

UW V W YY ZZ.
In the Ogbia Alphabet, by observation, the letters C, Q, and X are omitted. However, S takes
the sound of C, K takes the sound of C&Q while Z interchanges with J in spelling and
pronounciation. The Ogbia Alphabet consists of thirty -Six (36) letters which are grouped
into two namely; Vowels and Consonants. The sounds in any language like ours, is produced
by the combination of vowels and consonants as they blend together.

4

--- PAGE 11 ---
The Vowels......Avowel za
These are sounds that are freely produced from the lungs without any obstruction or
interruption of the air- stream at any point along the vocal tract or through the mouth.
The vowels of Ogbia are ten in number and two sets of five each .The first set of five are
called wide or long vowels e.g. A EI O U while the second set of five vowels with subdot
beneath, are called closed or short vowels e.g. A EI OQ U. The difference between the two
is that the long or wide vowels have long sounds during pronunciation while the short,
narrow or closed vowels are forcefully pronounce and dragged. The long vowels are
usually simple to master and teach while the short ones are not. Therefore, in presenting
the short and long vowels as a guide, one should always bear in mind that the letter you
write on the book or chalkboard, could have other pronunciation if not rightly placed,
and as such focus on the sound that you are presenting at that time as presented by the
specific symbol. One basic importance of the vowels is that every identified item in the
Ogbia Language begins with the vowel sound.
However, there are fifty-one vowels, grouped into monophthongs (short and long),
diphthongs, and triphthongs language which include -a-,-€- and -i-, Below is a vowel
harmony chart showing the two sets of ten oral vowels in Ogbia.
A E ] O U__widevowels
A E I] 0 Us narrowvowel
VowelSounds /fa aeeiioouiu/
Phonetic form
[a] [9] fe] [el G Gi) fo] [>] [4] [oe]
Vowel Chart of Ogbia

Front Uu

KO ;
_ ee
Mid J
4 )

Low .

Phonemic and Orthographic Representation of Oral Vowels in OQbhan Ogbia
Orthographic form
jaf ft ftike eg
fal ta apa ag
ef fe mt ead
ef te feted yam
if ft ight money
Ay inn eight
fof foot house
of ft fom mouth

5

--- PAGE 12 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
Phonemic and orthographic representation of distinctive nasal vowels in ogbia
Onhop
a
a
1.10 Vowel Harmony:
Vowel harmony can be described as a phonetic pattern or type of vowel assimilation which
demand that all vowels in a word must agree to share in one or more phonetic property.
This simply implies that vowels from opposing sets do not co-occur together, but each
group, work in agreement with the vowel in the same group at the initial. Vowel harmony is
present found in all the Central Delta, and the type found in these languages is known as
advanced tongue root [ATR] where the size of the pharynx plays a very important role in
distinguishing the vowel
Short vowel sound are written as single alphabet. i.e they are not doubled in some
instances, they are combined with the appropriate tone making to give the
a ato ‘ear’
e emu "head'
i ikpe ‘cloth'
) otu ‘house
u okuru "shepherd;s' bag’
Group 2. Narrow [Short Sound]
Letter phoneticsymbol root gloss
a a asial hair
e € elel yam
I i iinyan eight
0) p) onu mouth
u U ekpu tumor
Group 1: Wide [Long Vowel Sound]
Long vowel sounds are written by doubling the vowel sound in question. In some instance
in Ogbia speech, they are doubled, and combined with the appropriate tone markings to
give the intending meaning of the word. In other cases, the long vowel sound in a word may
depict the dialect that is being spoken instead of giving it a different meaning .Below are
some examples of words with long vowel sounds.
Letter root gloss
aa aagu ‘pipe’
ee eebe ‘open’
ii liyl ‘stream’
6

--- PAGE 13 ---
00 dolo ‘cry’
uu aduumu 'groan'
Group2. Narrow Vowels [Long Sounds]
Letter root word gloss
aa aasa ‘carried
ee eeld ‘groups’
Ul ‘inyo/iiny!' 'yes'
00 oolo ‘group’
uu wokuuluu ‘crown| future ]'
Vowel Sequence: This is a situation where two vowels appear in the same place in a word
without any problem, and it is also very common in the Central Delta languages like Ogbia.
Ogbia language have a sequence of vowels with either two, or three vowel sounds appearing in
a word and are identical, and non- identical. Some few examples are as stated in the following
words for easy identification;
Root "Meaning'
alai al ‘tooth'
egiasi 1a ‘spoon’
onuébéké ue "English language'
okiel ie ‘left’
odiom 10 ‘right’
obainyigi al big’
abaiekéné aie ‘generous;
kuué uue pursue
Monothongs: (short vowels)
| S/N | Letter | PhoneticSymbol | Keyword | Gloss
psu} a | OY | Aiba | God
(2 | oa | af | agbaka | ___ shoe
3. | e | /€&/ | epebe | _tent
4 |e | fe/ | ekpa | mortar
S| i fife | in tears
6 | i | UY | Isi/inyan | Not/eight
(7% | oo | fof | kata | sat
8 | oo | f/f | sini | Ambush
oo | ou | fu | gugu | Pit
okra
The sounds /U/ and /U/ never occupy word initiation position. They are found at medial
and final positions. /i/ is sparingly at word initial position as well.
7

--- PAGE 14 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
Monothongs (Long Vowels)
There are ten long vowels in Ogbia monophthongs and diphthongs as shown below:
Phonetic Symbd Keyboard
a
a
3 | ee | Ey | eee | Open
6 | eo | oe | toto
79 fey 0 Grou
oo | | ey fan | To swell
Diphthongs: (28)
There are twenty-eight diphthongs in Ogbia language, see below chart.
| S/N| Letter] PhoneticSymbo Keyword | __—Gloss
fa. | ai [| faif | obainyigi | great
fs. | ei [| /€i/ | _siseiny | please
fe. | eu [| /€uf/ | keu | dustyred
fs. | eu [| /eu/ | kpeu— | crystalclear |
po. | ia | fio/ | edia | food
fa1.| io [|  fio/ | _isio =| nine
[14.| ie [| fiey | arier | pity
}17.| of | foi/ | afoiny | tofloat
sound of hand knoc
19. oi /oi/ toiny/ little, plantain
ofoin
knock on the head
23. ui /ui/ tuiny movement of
plane/javelin
8

--- PAGE 15 ---
Triphthong:
It is a word that has a phonetic sequent of three sounds. In other words, a triphthong is a
word that has three vowels at the same position and articulated together gliding from the
first sound to the second, and then to the third. Triphthongs are present in Ogbia language,
this makes it unique among languages of the same family. Seven on them are attested in
Ogbia language, they are iai, iou, iai, iou, uai, uai, and uei.
| S/N | Letter | Phonetic Symbol
pa. { iai | fioif | Adiainy | Patience
3. /iai/ kiainy Piercing sensation of a
niddle, thorns, bones
6. | wai | fuai/ | —kuainy | ——Drydustysurface
Fold in same place
Consonants. ..........Akosonati za
Consonants are speech sounds which are produced when the air-stream coming from the
lungs is interrupted or obstructed (either partially or totally), especially to the flow of the
air by any of the organs of speech such as the teeth, lips, palate, uvula, nose etc. The
Consonants are twenty-six (26) letters which are also divided into three sets. The first set
consists ofB DFGHJ KLMNPRSTVWYandZare eighteen in number, while the second set
which are also called special symbols, consist of two (2) letters with subdot beneath Band
D. The third set are six (6) letters in number which are combinations of two letters each,
and are called Digraph. They are BH, GB, GH, KP, NW, and NY . The combination of these two
letters represents one sound in Ogbia Language ora Letter.
B, B,BH, D, D, F, G, GB, GH,H, J, K, KP, L,
M,N,NW,NY,P, R, S, T, V, WY, Z.
Phonetic forms of the Consonants
[b] [8] [B] [4] [4] [f] [g]{gb] [gh] [h][d3] [k] [kp]
9

--- PAGE 16 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
Table 1.1: Phonetic Consonant Chart of Ogbia
Manner of
Velar velar

[Implosives | b | = =| d@ | | |
|Affricate [| TCT
Nasls | om | | ty Tl

Fricatives h

bh f Vv

non

Nasalized

Trill

Approximant j

central
Fe aed a

Lateral

The Bible Society of Nigeria (2015).
Table 2. The Phonemic and Orthographic Consonant Distribution in Ogbia
Phonemic Orthographic | Word initial | Gloss Word media | Gloss
symbols symbols position

mw |e foe | nor fai ————fconrage

ele | oeme advice ahem | roadvice

ww |a faa suppor aaa fro support

va |e faa dance aga fro dance |

yw _ |e fae no agi frog

10

--- PAGE 17 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
PP Pe re
In the orthographic consonant representation, word initials and gloss are not used in the
naming of anything, but rather in the completion of a sentence or statement as
illustrated on the above table. There are also incidence of sounds and word deletion
either at the mid or end as shown above on the table. For instance, in the formation of
sentence with the verb run, isa command, while the root is yiliké or Asela, yiliké,
meaning, Asela_ should run. Again in the root word 'wa' meaning call. In making a
simple statement like, ...... please, call Asela for me meaning siseiny, wa Asela anye am.
The first sentence is showing command in the verb run while the second sentence is
showing a form of plead with low tone.
CHAPTER II WAALI EMU

Pronunciation Guide Awani Arara
Below is a combination of how the vowels, consonants and digraph are used in spelling and
pronunciation.

_ fA ja fe fe fi |! jo jo

0 [da _|da_[de_ [de [di [di [do [do [du [du

oe

ga_jea_ lee ee |ei [ei leo [eo jeu jeu |
[H [ha [ha [he [he [hi [hi [ho [ho [hu [hu |
11

--- PAGE 18 ---
J tia fie Hie Jie |i Ti tie io Tie iy
Ko fka [ka [ke ke [ki |ki [ko [ko [ku [ku
Cs Ee ee
P|pa [pe [re [re [ri [ri [eo |po [eu | pu
S_}sa_}sa_|se_Jse Jsi_|si_|so_ }so [su _|sy__
T |ta [te |te te [ti [ti [to [to |tu [tu |
v_|ve_|ve_|ve [ve [vi [vi ve [vo [vw |v
[Ww [wa [wa [we [we [wi [wi [wo [wo wu | wi
Z_|za_|za_|ze |e [zi |zi |zo [zo Jou | _
[Gb [sda [sbe | abe | ebe | sbi | sbi eb | ot |
[Nw | nwa | nwa | nwe | nwe | nwi | nwi | nwo | nwo | nwu | ny
[Ny | nya [nye [nye
Below is a simple guide on the sounds in English language that as you practice and make
perfect in your pronunciation of letters or sounds it will bring ease as you progress in
the Ogbia sound pronunciation and identification.
a At, as, axe Ba Bag, tag, bank
e Earth, air, egg, error. Be Bade, babe, bath
i Heat, heel, heal Be Bed, bet, beg, birth
f°) Ox, of, torch, off Bi Big, bid, bill
u Humble, hurry, hum Bo Both, boat, bowl
u Human, hurray, use Bo But, bus, bought
e Ate, aid, ape, eight Bu Book, booth, boot

12

--- PAGE 19 ---
I Eat, it, eve Bi Bite, bike, bind
re) Open, so, to Bu Busy, buzz, build
Da That, dad, dash Fa Fat, flat, fast
Dé Date, they, eight Fe Fade, failed, fake
De Death, deaf, dirt Fe Fed, fetch, fetish
Do Dose, those, though Fo Photo, fold, phone
Do Door, dog, doll Fo Fourth, fought, false
Di Dig, did, deal Fi Fill fit, feet
Di Dive,dice, die Fi File,find, fight
Du Do, dos, doob Fu Food, full, foot
Du Duty, due, dew Fu Fluid, future, funeral
Ga Guard, gas, gap Ha Ha,had,hat
Ge Gay, gaze, game He Hate, hail, hale
Ge Get, gear, gird He Hell, health, heard
Gi Give, guild, guilt Hi Heal, hill, hip
Gi Guide, gird, Hi Height, hike,
Go Go, goat, gold Ho Hollow, hope, hole
Go Got, gutter, God Ho Horror, hurry
Gu Good, goods, Hu Husband, human, hook
Gu Gulden, gulch, gule Hu Humble, hum, hurray
Ka Cat, cartoon, carton La Lash, last, lack
Ke Kate, cake, clay Le Lace, lay, late
Ke Kettle, Kelvin Le Letter, let, left
Ko Coat, coke, cold Lo Loaf, load, loan
Ko Cut, caught, cock Lo Lock, log, lot
Ki Kit, kid, keep Li Lit, lead, lean
Ki Kite, kind, Li Light, lime, life
Ku Cook, cool Lu Look, loot, loose
Ku Cute, cube Lu Luke, lube, lupin
Ma Mama, man, mat Na Now, natty, nag
Me Many, mate, make Ne Name, nature, native
Me Met, melt, Ne Never, nerve, neck
Mi Meet, meat, milk Ni Neath, niddle, nip
Mi Might, my, mine Ni Night, nine, nigh
Mo Mode, mould No Note, no, know
Mo Mud, morning, more No Nut, none, null
Mu  Mood,moon, mule Nu Noon, news, nude
Mu Mouth, mouse, Nu Noodle, noodling
Pa Papa, pant, park Ra Rat, rage, rap
Pe Page, past, paint Re Rate, radio, rape
13

--- PAGE 20 ---
Pe Pepper, peg, pet Re Rent, red, reckless

Pi Pit, pig, pillow Ri Rite, right, write

Pi Pile, pie Ri Wreath, read

Po Post, pose Ro Road, role, rope

Po Pot, poor, pond Ro Rod, wrath, rough

Pu Put, pull, push Ru Rude, rule

Pu Puzzle, pubes, pew Ru Root, rood, roof

Ta Tax, tab, tap Va Vat, van, value

Te Tape, tale, tail Ve Venn, vein

Te Test, tend, Ve Vet, vector, velvet

Ti Teeth, tit, Vi Village, vitamin, Vito

Ti Tight, tie, tire Vi Vile, viable, violent

To Toes, toad, told Vo Vote, vocal, vowel

To Taught, trod, turn Vo Von, volume, vulture

Tu Tuesday, tooth, tune Vu view

Tu Two, too, tools Vu Voodoo

Wa Want, watt, Ya Yard, yacht, yam

We Wait, wake, waiter Ye Yea, ye, yean

We Wet, wed, wealth Ye Yet, yes, yex

Wi Wheat, with, will Yi Yeast, yield

Wi While, why, white Yi Yipe,

Wo Wow, wo Yo Yoghurt, yoke, Yoruba

Wo What, war, ward Yo Yummy, young, yawn

Wu ~_—~Wool, would, whose Yu Yo, yolk

Wu ~~ ~Won't, wound, Yu You, yuga

Za Jab, zara, zap Ze Jacob, jail

Ze Zebra, Jet, zenith Zi Zip, zink

Zo Joseph, job, joke ZO Jug, jog, job

Zu Zoo, jew, juice

RULES IN WRITTEN OGBIA LANGUAGE

1. Diacritics, is an extra mark placed below, and above a vowel or aconsonant. For
example, the subdots used in Ogbia, are basically found in the narrow vowels thus:
aeiou. In spelling ,the dots must be reflected, and must be observed during
pronunciation to bring out the actual meaning .For example; aguo----hand, elel----
yam, Inyan----eight ,ofoiny---plantain.

2. Syllabic Nasal/ Tilde. Another sign used is called tilde with a ok sign [7] on any
letter, showing that the letter is nasalized that is, it has an fi or m, sounds during
pronunciation e.g. Qvindvind - mudwasp, mug - amigo, smoke - amiigu, Key -
asabi,spoon - egiasi

3. The use of doted vowels at the beginning of a word, implies that all the internal
vowels in the words are also doted. In the cause of pronunciation, one must apply

14

--- PAGE 21 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
the rule on all the vowels in the words, e.g. oghogho - grass. By pronunciation, all the
internal vowels are supposed to be doted ones, but not usually included in the spelling. The
correct spelling is oghogho, meaning the first letter with subdot ‘O' has covered all others.

Examples ofsome words are;
aguo - ‘aguo' - hand
ekpasala-aguo - ekpasala-aguo - finger
efere - eféré - plate
alai - alai - tooth
okpakpa - okpakpa - ogbono
4. The use of special consonant b and d in spelling. No matter where they occur, the spelling
and pronunciation does not change but are maintained. e.g.
adibiri - adibiri - Mango
ebeke - ebékée - English
abebe - abébé - Different
obele-ebeke - obéle-ébéké - English pot
biblom - bibilom - fillto brim
abem - abém - advice
5. Law of Vowel insersion:
This law states that , if two or more consonants sounds come together or occur closely
together to appear in word, a vowel is always inserted. This is because, Ogbia language does
not allow consonant cluster hence, a vowel sound must be inserted between the two
consonants to bring out the actual meaning of the word. For example, in words like eplepcy,
is spelt epilepusi; leprosy is elepirosi, glass - egilasi, bread-abiredi, flower-afilaba, flour-
afilawa, soursop-asawasopu, market-amaketi; pencil-apenisulu, innuwawam-iniwawam -
you will call me, Twanaziba-Tuanaziba - draw close to God.
6. Law of vowel sound deletion; Given two words, if the first word ends with a vowel, and
the second word begins with a vowel, the first letter in the second word will dominate the
last word in the last letter thereby deleting the sound during pronunciation, but is inclusive
during spelling. e.g
Wa ebal webal goodmorning
minaaaru minaaru Iam coming
mina agi minagi lam going
wa ogbeera wogbeera goodafternoon
waigulu wigulu goodevening
7. Law of vowel sound and symbol deletion; This is a situation where both sound and
symbols are deleted expecially in the spelling of names of persons. Names of persons in
Ogbia language are in the form of statements, and this law helps to reduce or clip the
statement into a simple word with the required meaning.e.g
Aziba ke edigiri Azibakedigiri itis God that knows
Daamini damini itis mine/mine
Anion ke edgiri elegen Aniokedigirelegen who knows tomorrow?
Bho Azibaaaro Abhazibaaro lookunto God and live
15

--- PAGE 22 ---
8. Digraph: These are two letters representing one sound during pronunciation. In Ogbia
language, they are six, and are listed below;bh, gb, gh, kp, nw and ny. Example of the use in
spelling;

akpa - akpa - ‘bag’

agbaka - agbaka - ‘shoe’

okpokpo - okpokpo - ‘bone’

okpdékp6é - okpdokp6é - ‘Indian bamboo'

okpokt - okpoki - ‘jellyfish’

onyan - onyan - ‘girl;

anwiana - anwiana - ‘girls’

ogbela/igbela - ogbela - ‘advocacy’
9. Tone marking: Tone marking is the pitch of the voice that can make a different to the
meaning of words with the same spelling .Nigeria has more than five hundred and twenty
five (Ejele 2024) languages ,and all are tone languages except: Fulfulde. This implies that,
the pitch of the voice can make a difference to the meaning of the word. For example, in
Ogbia, if we say 6nobhiri-adiza with raised voice, we mean a very bold and “courageous
woman”, if we say it with a voice lowered onobhiri-adiza, it means one that have no respect
for elders while the third with mid-tone voice in between onobhiri-adiza means a woman
that behaves like a man. This marking of the variations in the pitch of the voice is what
makes the difference. In Ogbia, we have three types commonly marked with strokes. The
high tone is marked with stroke (/) raised to the right, low tone is marked with stroke (\)
raised to the left;both placed on the vowel sound. However, the mid-tone is
unmarked.Ogbia also has a gliding tone marked by [*] sign as in kue, tie, gie, bhie. Few
examples are
até to plan
ato to measue
alabh heis rich
alabh is he rich?
Asela aaru has Asela come?
Asela aart Asela has come.
Asela aaru let Aselacome.
WORDS
Words are the fundamental building units of a language sound or a segment of speech or an
element which can stand independently as an utterance. It can further be expressed as the smallest
meaningful unit of an utterance of a language that makes a larger sentence. Its aim is to show how
words work in the grammar of a language in the mental dictionary of a speaker, including
pronunciation, meaning, and grammatical properties with meaning, formed by the joining of
letters. They could be two letter words, three letter words etc.
PRIMARY WORD FORMATION AKENE ENUEMAITIOM
Two letter words Waali ikposi
‘Root Gloss'
ba b+ta ‘is not’
da dt+a ‘support’
ka k+a ‘carve’
lo +o ‘put’

16

--- PAGE 23 ---
16 1+6 ‘build’
sa Sta ‘lift’
ta tta ‘imitate'
SO S+O ‘search’
de ‘but’
wa ‘call’
bha ‘to paddle’
gha ‘open your mouth’
né ‘and’
kpa "speak'
nya ‘drag’
go 'read'
mi 'I/ myself’
gho ‘buy’
bho ‘look’
nye ‘give’
kpo ‘pack’
weé ‘fight’
da ‘dance’
dé ‘eat’ [food]
wa' ‘eat'[fish/meat]
‘Saari ikposi Three letter words.
bam b+ta+m ‘T don't have'
otu o+t+u ‘house’
tié tt+i+é ‘come’.
gié gtité kill’
gie ‘gO!
ému ‘head’
emu ‘birthmark’
ato ‘ear’
onu ‘mouth’
anwu ‘you’
anwi ‘children’
ami 'T / myself’
616 ‘play’
bhié/pié ‘have it, take’
inyi/inyo 'yes'
dua ‘leave' / go away
inya ‘four’
awe 'to fight’
sué ‘holdit’

17

--- PAGE 24 ---
Inya Ikposi Four letter words.
aguo ‘hand'
wale ‘count
aaru ‘has come’
aaru ‘has he come?
ogia ‘knife’
ogia ‘itis knife’
ogia ‘is it knife’
totd ‘sitdown’
obud ‘cup’
ooru ‘sing’
ohon ‘mother'
onyam ‘girl’
pok6é ‘look'
arua ‘shirt’
done ‘move'
akpim ‘football’
dimé ‘offit’
bhira ‘turn’
oyel "boy'
gbide ‘clean it’
imor ‘related’
osobh ‘spear’
agbam ‘place on'
wele ‘leave it’
Owu ikposi Five letter words.
aliké ‘leg’
igbdogi ‘money’
egara ‘pepper’
obélé ‘pot’
igbama bell’
agbaka ‘shoe’
ababa ‘bucket’
obha ‘breath’
ababa ‘bucket’
obha ‘breath’
ogidi ‘matchet'
ékuné ‘mat’
oldlo ‘bottle’
okpoété ‘brain’
alépe ‘fire’
igddo ‘padlock’
abidi ‘dread'
adumo ‘riddle’
opitan/ipitan ‘debate’
oburu ‘wander'
Odin Ikp6si Six letter words.
onuéma ‘Language’
Gimadé 'Fork'
awudum Life’
éwézén ‘free’
'égidba/elamanobu ‘peace’
etaria ‘love’
ekéfér scale
idiumom faith’
anwunom ‘people’

18

--- PAGE 25 ---
dumomé ‘accept’

amamam ‘breast’

iténan 'relationship'

agbana ‘arrow'

Odual Ikp6si Seven letter words.

osalama ‘comb'

ekpukpuan ‘enemity'

abuluki ‘gown’

endmoti ‘milipede'

okpabhama "scissors'

ékpékéré ‘hynia’

agbalala ‘thunder’

abegeré ‘two edged sword'

ekpénekpé ‘drumsticks’

ewewema "smoothner

eghelama ‘file’

okilolo guitar

EIGHT LETTER WORDS WAALIIKPOSI BA DIOBH

ebebelem ‘frame’

odemadia "next of kin'

kotutuga ‘don't think’

iguekpukpu ‘enemies’

ozologan "quiz'

adieneto ‘policy’

obhibhilom ‘wind’

ameleiny ‘facts’

NINE LETTER WORDS ONIN IKPOSI BA DIOBH

ovinivint "mudwasp'

iteneguma "spatula’

ebhelebhelé ‘cockroach’

eleleguma marker

egorogoro chain

odidiimor leanage

ikpukpologi chest

elemanobu peace

TEN LETTER WORD DIOBHIKPOSI

ogbo-ekakainy mosquito net

oféguma-anyu ceiling fan

Aruniboman come with praise

ekolomaguo elbow

edigiribhar wisdom

edigirabhar knowledge

MINIMAL PAIRS; These are words that vary on only one sound either at the intial, or

midal orendasin

p/b Opa- that t/d __ tie-come €/€ ws dé---eat

oba - story die - metion de----but
bh/gh bho----look a/e wa—call 0/0 16----build
gho---buy we---fight lo----put/puton
ovi - wistle
Ovi - COW

19

--- PAGE 26 ---
SECONDARY WORD FORMATION
1. Affixation as a morphological process
Affixation is a major word formation process whereby affixes are attached to the base or
roots of verb to create new words form lexemes ( Emenanjo & Oweleke 2012). It is a
process of addition, in which bound morphemes are attached to free morphemes to give us
lexical words. To support this view, Crystal (2008), sees it as a morphological process of
attaching grammatical and lexical information to stem in order to change the word- class
Types of Affixation
Affixation can be classified into two main types which is centered on the basis of their
positional relationship to that of the base, and on the basis of the function which they
perform. For the purpose of this work, the positional type of affixes will be the point of
discussion.
Positional Types of Affixes
These affixes are classified as preffixation, infixation, circumfixation, interfixation and
suffixation, which are explained below, and out of these, prefixes and suffixes are the
commonestin the languages of the world.
a. Prefixation - This is a situation whereby the letter or letter[s] is attached at the
beginning of the base word to create a word as shown below
PREFIX VERBS MEANING DERIVED GLOSS
a wa call awa To call
a de eat ade To eat
a la puton\wear ala To puton
a we fight awe To fight
a bho look aboh To look
b. Suffixation: A suffix is an affix that is added to the end of the word, (Yule 2007).
Matthews (2007), identifies the suffix as an affix that comes after the form to which it is
added. Example - ness in boldness, kindness, fearless etc. Kari (2015) also describe
suffixes as a letter or a word that occurs after the base with example from Degema
language. Ogbia language also form new words through suffixation. For example:
VERB MEANING SUFFIX DERIVED
alo to weave ma oloma
agbol to drive ma ogboloma
oigu to cutdown ma oguoma
aruan to teach ma oruanama
ege to write ma egema
2. Compounding:
Compounding is a morphological process which exists in virtually all languages as it's
stands as a linguistic universal feature which is used to derived new words both
grammatical, and semantically as single word. Compounds are often lexicalized. Selkirk
(1982), sees compounding in English as a type of word structure made up of two
constituents, each belonging to one of the categories: noun, adjective, verb etc. Kari (2015),
describes compounding as the process of forming words by combining two or more
independent morphemes or words called a compound or compound words. He cities

20

--- PAGE 27 ---
examples like: shoehorn and headboy. Each of these words are nouns but one can combine
root morphemes or words from the same or different word classes or parts of speech to
produce a new word. In other words in compounding there are two or more independent
words where one of them is a noun ,and the other is either a noun, verb or adjective, and
are combined to form anew word which is confirmed to be a noun. Ndimele (2008), points
out that one interesting quality of compounds is that the overall meanings are not always
equal to the meaning of the individual words with which are composed .Fore instance, in
examples like housefly ,and campbed, their meanings can be predicted but in examples
like blackleg (betrayer), and wet blanket (spoiler) do not reflect the individual meaning.
1. black+leg blackleg betrayer

Ozuzutalike ozuzualike ilumilu
2. canoe+sky canoesky aeroplane

Oowu+anyu oowuanyu oowuanyu
3. outside+shoe outside shoe a pair of shoe

Etire+agbaka etireagbaka etireagbaka
4. house+cloth house cloth piece of wrapper

Otu+ikpe otuikpe otuikpe
5. house+fly housefly housefly

Otu+abhulu otuabhulu egi
3.Segment Modification: This is a crucial process of changing the meaning of a word by
modifying one or more of the sounds or letters thereby allowing languages to create new
words that have different meaning, and new grammatical function. It can be successfully
done through affixation by adding prefixes or suffixes to the word in other to change it's
meaning, by inflectional modification such as adding -s- to form a plural noun, and through
derivational modification by adding -ful- to form an adjective. In Ogbia the base is change
either of the initial at the derived stage. For examples -

Anem-to create oneme-creation

Odiologo-admire ediologi-admiration

Alebh-invite ilebh-invitation

Abaram-repeat obaram-repetition

Akokodan-gather ikokodan-gathering
4. Borrowing: This is one of the most common way of creating new words by taking words
from one or more languages to fit into the vocabulary of another language, thereby
expanding the language. Ndimele[2007], identified three different forms of borrowing
which include; Loan word,Loan blend, and Loan calque Translation.
There are three different forms of borrowing which include ; Loan word ,Loan blend, and
Loan calque Translation
[a] Loan -Word: A loan word is a word which a recipient language has lifted from a donor
language to mean same object, and practice to which it originally refered in the donor
language. This implies that, a prefix from the recipient language is lifted and added to the
new word and pronounced almost as the word from the donor language. [Donwa-Ifode
1996;135]; For example ,in Ogbia,bread.........abiredi. Tomato.........atomatosi, fan----afan
[b] Loan-Blend: A loan-blend is a process of forming a word by combining morphemes of
different languages to represent the word that look exactly what is in the donor language.
Forexample motorroad----eso amoto, where eso is road

21

--- PAGE 28 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....

[c].Loan Translation: Here loan words are used to represent all the senses in the donor
language. For example, in English word like airplane, the Igbo translate it as boat that
moves in the sky, mmiri' boat ugbo ala, in Ogbia language it is oowuanyu where canoe os
oowu mo sky is anyu, mosquito net is ogbo ekakiny, where net is ogbo and mosquito is
ekakainy.
5. Reduplication: Is the repetition of a word or part of a word to create a new word. It is
used in many languages to convey different meanings like intensification, plurality or to
create new words. In ogbia language, it is used to lay emphasy on a word in order to create a
new word with new meaning.
Beloware few examples:
1. Child- anyi child child onyionyi childish nekeneadionyi
2. love- tare love love tare tare excessive-affection-obetaria
3. wash-pue washwash- puepue launderer-opuema
4. head- ému headhead- emuemu large- headed- adikiri
5. greed- okuku greed-greed- okukuokuku greedy -obokuku
6. jealous-epenadien jealousjealous epenadienepenadien jealousy- obepenadien
7. lie- asiabharilu lielie- asiabhariluasiabhariluliar- | osiomabharilu
8. tears-izin tearstears _ izinizin teary- ibizin
9. laugh- adiel laughlaugh- adieladiel laughter-obadiel
10. power-ek power power ekparekpar quickly -inugian
6. Idlophonies/Descriptive words: Ideophones are words in a language that elicit an
emotional response due to their synesthetic qualities or mimicry of natural sound.
Below are few examples:
1. Pasapasa very dirty
2. gbogborobh handsome
3. kpebem/ewabh/ekpeha short person
4. d666 quite/cool
5. Onyoro beautiful person
6. muusu romantic eyes
7. kpikpikpi very tight
8. digilogo very fat
9. ogbooro long legs
10. dogorogo/gulabh weak person
PARTS OF SPEECH - Ekpagi Osi
1. Noun-anau: is defined as the name of anything which include persons/beings and non-
living beings e.g places-esi, animal-enam, persons-anwunom, towns-ema, trees-iren, and
ideas-owalologi.

Iyengw, kol&Agholo

adiri

adegia

Ikirikiri

M asquerade treren ipo

22

--- PAGE 29 ---
2. Verb-Avebu: This is the most important word in the slot of the sentence as it determines
the type of word that occurs in the position and as a subject of the sentence. It can also be
refered as an action word e.g ate - aadé, eat - adé, put - alo, gave - aanyé, give - anyé, call -
awa, Called - aawa, gié - go, sit down - toto, lo - build, sa - lift, bath - wura, action - ekene,
teach - ruane, drink - bhuo, climb - bhune, learn - rua
3. Adverb-Adivebu: It's a word that modifies a verb by the addition of a suffix such as “er”,
lyandeste.g, previous -ifiatena , previously - ifiateni.
It can also be used to show comparism e.g
Last - Osisio Lastly- Osisia | Sluggish- Sluggishly-
pare fear reenes——(Reensasne
Absolute- Absolutely- Anxious- Anxiously-
Slow- doo Slowly- doodood | Careless- Carelessly-
pore Pee [eon pemme
Quick - nuge Quickly - Wise - Wisely -
pe" [ican [eignar [eben
Gentle - agiobu | Gently - Frequent - More frequent -
ee agony [stam [etaraohron
Careful - Carefully - Aggressive - More aggressively
Perfect - Perfectly - Soft - agura Softly - inomaguru
aman [atemanan [en |
4. Pronoun- Apuronau; A word that can change the form ofanoun by replacing ite.g.
I-we, we - US, he - him, she - her
ami - aari aari - aari eno - eno eno-eno
5. Adjective-Adijetivi: Is a words that describes or complement a certain noun in the slot
of the sentence or modifies anoun or pronoun or as acollective noun.
Beautiful girl - obebi-onyan obebi onyan
Fat man - Obdkpo-dnobhiri obdékponobhiri
Old man - igbolorn-onobhiri igb6loménobhiri
Foolish boy - egogolegogolo oyel egogolegogolo oyél
23

--- PAGE 30 ---
Itcan also be used to show comparism by the addition ofa suffix -er
Ro [Sue [eaten

Wide - areiny | Wider —areiny a | agedwomen — igbolom awar The aged women -—
ea eed ee
Adjectives-Adijekitivi: can also be described as intensifiers that amplifies or strengthen
the meaning of the nouns they modify. e.g.
Too small - ekiri-aten
Quite big - abo-ogba
Very ugly - agorom atén
Extremely beautiful - abaiaten
Very short - okpekper/akper aten
Very long - owé aten
so long - aweia
the short - ikpekper za
the big - ibokpo za
the long - iweiweiza
the ugly - ekarabiza
6. The preposition-Apireposison: This shows relationship between words and is use
before noun, pronoun or gerund e.g of - ta, with-na, inspite of- ekpesu aka, apart from -
atena, behind-aman, inside-ologi, on-obu, by-akpokpom, on top of -aga anyu a, beonging to
-te,ofta taasela-ofasela te asela-belonginto-asela
They can also include verbs ending with ing e.g borring - amfbéné, recording - égakuti,
following-abharan, fulfilling-iizoloman
7. Interjection-itajeson: Is a word or expression that occurs as an utterance on its own
and expresses a feeling of emotion or exclamation or feelings such as surprise, pain or
horror e.g Joy e.g Yes -inyii,! No- héé! eh-ei! Alas- mi apu! Yea- yee! Oh- ooo! cheers! Hold it -
nwereteme! hee - haa - question? ere! what eria! so amazing!

24

--- PAGE 31 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
no! - héehée yes! - inyi! bravo! -  agud | Wow! - éria!
anyuanyu!
What? - éré! So beautiful! - | God! — Aziba! My God! Azi ba-
abaiatén! amini!
I am finished! -|I am lost! —|I am dead! — mi| God, where are
Mi iwv/apu! mi apu! iwi! you! - Aziba,
nwu 61a akéi!
Really! - Adégi!, | It’s not easy! | It’s so easy! - | How dare you! —
Obd - akpara! agura! akpémuckpo ana
God save me! How great is | Quite surprised So long a while
Aziba- our God!
tenemanam Aboka —aziba | elei! I ade kpa na
arar! adein!
8. Conjunction Akonujoson: These are words used to join parts of sentences or two or more
sentences together e.g and-dine, if- asi, but-de, so that-bokeé, or-oboba, nor-dboba, unless-
ateneman, although-esuaka, perhaps-odiodipé, whether-akuoda/adipe, whenever-
6k6k6neokoko, when-akere okoko, between-ogbesédo.
9. Determinant- Aditaminat: The determinants are used to express some statements or
thoughts that have meaning but are not complete. They are used to qualify the noun as a singular
or plural. E.g a — the, my ours yours, theirs collection. By the analysis on the given table in the
ogbia language, they cannot stand alone.
Gloss root
A shirt — arua The shirts -— | A boy — oyel The boys — iyel
arua za za
A cup - obuo The cups -|Awoman -adiza |The women —-
ebuo za awar za
A door — egu The doors -—| Asoap - oso The soaps - eso
igu za za
A bucket - ekpa- | The buckets -| A car —|The cars —
oduamu/ ababa_ | ababa za owuegbolom iwuégbolom za
25

--- PAGE 32 ---
A basket —| The baskets—| A lamp atukpa | The lamps —
fssom pom (inn
A book adiri The books -| A comb -|The combs—
ie eee
The girl onyan| The girls -|A broom -|The brooms—
A table ede-ode | The tables -| A chair obaku The chairs —
ee cae toe
Alter— okpo The alter okpo| A cup-obuo The cupsebuo
aa a ea
Church asosi The church—/|A lampatukpa | The lamps
i eer eo
Boy- oyél The boy- oyel a; A houseotu The housestu
ae es el
Rich— olala The rich- elala| A bag-akpa The bags akpa
—_ a_i
10. Auxiliary verb-Imor Akeradien Avebu: These are verbs that are subordinate to the
main verb and as such different from them is a number of ways. It can also help in reducing
do akeni, can-naine, will-na,shall-na akene, must-ra akenekpa ana the model auxiliary
verbs are sometimes ofanegativetype. _
GLOSS OGBIA OGBIA GLOSS
Can't iné si ko ode don’teat
Didn't okéné si ko ogi don’t go
Couldn't iné siakéné kiigi don't dig
Shouldn't isi dinakéné ke elo don’tlaugh
Hasn't diokene ke eteta don't be afraid
Don’t ko, ko ke, ke, ki
. ; _. CHAPTER IIT SAARI EMU
WANAN ONU OQGBIA
(GREETINGS IN OGBIA LANGUAGE)
English Language(Onu ébéke) Onu éma ogbia
(One Person) oninoni (Many people] ibaturu anwinom
Good Morning Wa ebal ini wa ebal
Good Afternoon Wa ogbéera ini wa ogbéera
26

--- PAGE 33 ---
Good Evening Wa igulu ini waigulu
Good night Dué ebal idué wa ebal
Welcome nwuadon/Alua ini waadon
Thank you nwu agiri/ Alua ini wa agiri
Greeting an elderly ogbonuma,wa ebal. egba anwinom
man in the morning. Alikeoladé. za, ini waebal.
Alikeoladé.
Greeting an elderly inuo/amama, wa ebal. {hon za atim,
woman inthe Alikeolade. ini wa ebal.
Alikeoladé morning.
Are you alright? Nwu oola ké oni? ini flake anwtnom?
Howis your neighbour? Imorakpokpom ana ke? imorakpokpom za
itin ke?
Howis your sister? onyan-imor ana ke? anwinyanimor za
itin ke?
Howare you? Ba aka héé /aaka? ini ila?
Yes, Goodmorning inyo, wa ebal finyi ,ini wa ebal
Have you arrived nwuaaru ite? ini wa aaru ite?
Howis your family? omarana ke/otuana ke? emar za itin ke?
Howis your mother? ohon ana ke? ihon za itin ke?
Are you still awake? Nwt biosér adi 0? ini biosér Adu 0?
Howare your parents? inuonorio ana ke? inuonerio zaitin ke?
Howis your father Owede ana dine ohon ewede dine ihon
and mother? ana ke? za itin ke?
Howis your owakpokpom Iguakpé6kpom
neighbour? ana ke? za itin ke?
Howare your imorza imorza
siblings? ata ke? itin ke?
Howare your Anwiza Anwiza
children? ata ke? itin ke?
Howis your son? onobhironyima ana ke? Inobhiri anwi za itin ke
Howis your daughter? onyanonyima ana ke? anwiyananwizaitin ke
Howis your wife? adizaanake awar za itin ke?
Journey mercies Bho adon ibho waadon
Howis your husband ohonom ana ke ihonom za itin ke
lam fine Mioola Aariila
Are you sound Obuanape ibu za itin
in health? oleku akpar? pe ilaeku akpar?
Embrass me boleam boleam
27

--- PAGE 34 ---
Howis your ebharanedon ébharanedon
friend? ana ke? za itin ke?
Is your father at home? owede ana oolaema? ewede za itin ilaema?
Are you going? Nwu naagio? ini wa agio?
Are you tired of crying? Nwu oolo agebho ini wa 6olo agbebh ?
Are you going Nwuikitona ini waikitona
back? naagio wa agio?
My father, good Owede amini, Ewede zaatim,
morning wa ebal ini wa ebal
My mother, Ohon amini, Thon zaatim, ini
good morning wa ebal wa ebal
My brother, Onobhirimor inobhirimor za
good morning amini, wa ebal atim ini wa ebal
My sister, good Onyanimor anwiyanimor za
morning amini, wa ebal atim, ini wa ebal
Our father, Owede arar, Ewede za atar,
goodmorning waebal ini wa ebal
our mother, Ohon arar, {hon za atar ,ini
good morning wa ebal wa ebal
Our sister, Onyanimor Anwinyanimor
good morning arar, wa ebal za atar,ini wa ebal
Befast Nwu inugian e inugiane
My friend, Ebharanedon Ebharanedon
good morning amini, wa ebal za atim, ini wa ebal
My neighbour, Owakpokpom Iguakpokpom za
good morning amini, wa ebal atim,ini wa ebal
My customer, Imorabua amini, Imorabuaza
good morning wa ebal atim, ini wa ebal
My mother, Ohon amini, Thon za atim ini
you are welcome nwu aadon. waadon
My father, you Owede amini, Ewede zaatim,
are welcome nwu aadon iniwaadon
My friend, you Ebharanedon Ebharanedon
are welcome amini, nwuadon za atim, iniwaadon
Our landlord, you Obanaotu arar, Ibanaitu za
are welcome nwuadon atar, iniwaadon
My sister in-law, Anwininiamini, Anwininiza
You are welcome nwuadon atim, iniwaadon
Welcome back Nwuadon/alua Ini waadon
from the farm

28

--- PAGE 35 ---
Welcome back Nwuadon/alua Ini waadon
Stay in peace/restin peace giobe aaro igiobe wa aaro
Go in peace giobe agi/gie foofoo egie foofoo
Goodbye/farewell baio
I believe that, your Miadumom be, Miadumom be
from the office nwu aadua egiri aaru ini wa aadua egiri aaru
journey was good edon ana abai edon inin abai
Iam notin haste Miinugiansi Aari inugiansi
It's onlyajoke Minaoloola Aariwaolo ola
Sit well toto abaiman etoto wa abaiman
I'min haste Mina anugian aari wa anugian
Are you back from Nwu adua iniwaadua
farm edum aaru? edum aaru hee?
Are you back from Nwu adua Ini wa adua
the office? Egiri aaru? egiri aaru héé?
Are you back from Nwu aduaegela ini wa aduaegela
the market? amaketia amaketi a/aaru?
aaru/nwu adua
egela etirabua aaru? iniwaadua egela

amaketiaaaru/

egelaetirabua aaru?
‘safe trip’ (land) bho adono ibho waadon
‘safe trip’ water bho abha ibho waabha
Welcome/weldone alua aluao!
Thank you/thanks nwu agiri Agiri/alua
are you going back nwu ikitona na agi ini wa ikitona wa agi
Words and meaning: Enuosi na atugu za
Person ----------oni People-----------anwtnom
Boy---------------dyél Girl--------------onyandényi
Boys--------------fyél Girls-------------anwinyananwi
These boys ------iyél za izéna These girl-------anwinyana za izéna
Young boy ------okubh éyél Young girl------6kubh-onyan
Young boys -----ikubh iyél Young girl------ikubh anwinyana
Brother-----------onobhirimor Sister------------onyanimor
This girl----------onyan omana This boy---------dyél omana
Brothers----------inébhirimor Sisters-----------anwinyanimor
Man---------------ondbhiri Woman---------adiza
Men---------------indébhiri Women---------awar
Father-------------owédeé Mother----------dhon
Fathers------------ewédé Mothers---------fhon
My father---------owéde amini My mother------6h6n amini
My husband------6h6n6m amini My wife------- --adizaamini
My sister----------onyanimor amini My brother------onobhirimo ramini
Friend-------------ébharanedon My friend--------ebharanedonamini
Aged man---------igb6l6m 6nébhiri Aged men---------igb6lom inobhiri
Aged woman------igb6l6m adiza Aged women-----igb6lom awar
Neighbour---------imorakpé6kpom My neighbour-----imorakpé6kpom amini
Baby----------------aduonyi Babies-------------aduanwi

29

--- PAGE 36 ---
Child----------------onyi Adult---------------ogbdéoni
Relation-------------imor Relationship-------iténan
Grandmother-------6hé6n6éo0bo Grandfather-------owéde 60b0
Grandchild----------onyighéla great-grandchild--onyésésa
between------------Ogbésédo birth------------------emara
beside--------------akpé6kpOm birthday-------------adiemara
next of kin---------odémadia landmark-----------ogbagi
Birthmark---------eému palour--------------ordérd6tu
Footmark--------ezeremalike handstride---------etataraguo
Palms------------ezeremagua bundle--------------oghorogi
Birthrite----------adia mucor---------------ebubtum
Spirogyra-----------adidiko frame-----------------ebebelem
Mud------------------etokolo cement--------------------asiméti
Step mother---------adiza owede step father-----ohonom ohon
blackboard-------okpokpolomorua ameu------honey
ekpakpar----enuosi
COMPLEX WORDS IN OGBIA Ebakalabakala Enuema
Halfbrother----oninorio/onininuo onobhiri ben
halfsister----oninorio/onininuo adiza ben
aunt---------adizaimor ate ohon/owede
uncle--------onobhirimora te ohon/owede
nephew-----onobhironyima adizimor/onobhirimor
niece--------onyanonyima adizimor/onobhirimor
Asikiri Enuosi Dine Atugu Za
Other Words and Meaning
I/myself ami you anww’
She eno he eno
We aari they awod
Those izua these izéna
Mine damini there égéla
Yours zaata ours za atar
Theirs za atuo mine za atim
Whose za anion when akere ifie
Where akéi How iteaka/akuaka
What éré/éria! Which akéreé
30

--- PAGE 37 ---
Here eséna there égéla
group oolo that opa
Who anion why atugakere'
eat dé eating nade
Dance egba dancing nadaegba
Cry dolo crying naoolo
Laugh elo laughing naelo
Come tié coming na aaru
Go gie going naagi’
Look bhé looking naabho
See eni seeing naeni
Read go reading naogo
Write ege writing naegé
Call wa calling naawa
Climb abhunu climbing naabhunu
Jump pélé jumping na apel
Fight wé fighting naawe
Sing ooru singing naooru
Shout 6k6kian shouting na 6k6kian
Run ayiliki running na ayiliki
Cook akasi cooking naakasi
Bath awura bathing naawura
Boil abhulu boiling naabhulu
Fly abhulu flying naabhulu
Simple Sentence eguguru enuosi
ami I/myself
minaaaru Iam coming
adiamol6gi Ilike it
minaagi lam going
agbébham Iam tired
daamini itis mine
Minaadé lam eating
mi egisi Iam not going
mi irisi Iam not coming
minaogo Iam reading
minaegé lam writing
miegisi I'm not going
mi egisi ési I'm not going anywhere
mi naakpa onuébéké Iam speaking English language
amine owédé amini waagi ési Iand my father are traveling.

31

--- PAGE 38 ---
ami ne Abai wa aaru Iand Abai are coming.
akpim adiélégiami dine Ajimisi Iand James are interested in football
ami pe 6wa mdaegi égélaigula Itis !who went to the room.
miapom aséradu elégeéna I went to bed early yesterday.
Du mina ap6m ostima kaka adi6 I woke up early everyday
Mina lo dine onyanimor amini Iam playing with my sister
Ami dine onyanimor amini wa 6lo Iam my sister are playing
Mi adi ne 6nobhirimor amini Iam eating with my brother
ami ne onobhirimor amini wa adébhar Iam eating in the same plate with
Oldgi 6nin eféré my brother
Mi aébharanedonata Aménidin Iam Menidin's friend
Miatarda Ilove you
owa mietéra the one! love
Miatar daaten Ilove youso much
dunwunaawam I wish you had called me
Du mina ikioma égéla édia Ido think about the future
Mina ini agbal obu amini Ican take care of myself
mina épéré Iam happy
agbébham Tam bored
ami béné moola Iam lonely
Du mina awanan intonorio amini I greet my parents every morning
kaka astuta.
mi édigéri do. I know her
mi édigéri do. Iknowhim
mi édigéri aw6. Iknowthem
mi edigiri si Idon'tknow
mi onyan. lama girl
mi oyél. lama boy
mina agi lam going
épobh naasuam Iam hungry
mina abaimanolégi Iam delighted
minaagam/miebaimansi 6l6gi Iam not happy
mina epénadien Iam jealous
bam/miibana si I don't have.
mi oni de éléman 6bu Iam a peaceful person.
midola Tam fine.
mi idesi edia za ogbéera I did not eat lunch.
mina akddi. Tam waiting.
mina ak6di da. Iam waiting for you.
Mina ak6ddi 6koko 4 opaamini Ian waiting for my own time.
kode okokoa opaana wait for your own time.
miédigirida . Iknowyou,
miedigirisida Idon'tknow you.
minaagam. Iam angry.
omana ké éré? whatis this?
opa ké éré? whatis that?
onyim6o opaadému atén That child is so wicked.
awo waagi. They are going.
ésinesi anywhere
akub6o agana this way

32

--- PAGE 39 ---
akubo égéla that way
akpokpom égua close to the door/beneath the
door'

aman égutia behind the door/back ofthe door'

egelaamanegua at the back ofthe door'

egelaanyu above the sky'

egelaaganyu ontop of'

egelaaganyuotu a on top ofthe house’

One Person Two Persons Many People

Onin oni waalianwunom ibaturu anwunom

"Tam cooking we are cooking they are cooking’

Minaakasi aari wa akasi awo wa akasi

‘Tam eating weare eating they are eating

Mina adé aari wa ade awo waadé

‘Tam writing weare writing they are writing

Minaege aari wa egeée awo wa ege

‘Tam reading we are reading they are reading

Mina ago aari wa ago awo wa ago

‘Tam dancing we are dancing they are dancing

Mina adaégba aari wa adaégba awo wa adaegba

Iam laughing we are laughing they are laughing

Minaelo aariwaelo awo waelo

‘Tam singing weare singing they are singing

Minaooru aariwaooru awo wa ooru

‘Tam hot we are hot they are hot

ibéginaaastam Ibogi na aast aari Ibdgina aast awo

Iam sitting down Weare sitting down They are sitting down

mi atotd aari wa atoto awo wa atotd

‘Tam standing up Weare standing up They are standing up

miadutaéra aari waaduaera awo waaduaera

Iam going Weare going They are going

minaagi aari wa agi awo wa agi

‘lam coming We are coming they are coming

mi naaaru aari wa aarul awo wa aaru

Iam sleeping we are sleeping they are sleeping

mi aséradu aarl wa aseradu awo wa aseradu

‘Tam crying Weare crying They are crying

mina oolo aari wa 0olo awo wa 6olo

Iam clapping we are clapping They are clapping

minaatimekpékpé aariwadatim ekpékpé awo waatim ekpékpé
33

--- PAGE 40 ---
Tam playing we are playing They are playing

minaolo aari wa 6lo awo wa 61O

Iam sweeping we are sweeping They are sweeping

minaowol aari wa owol awo wa owol

Tam thirsty weare thirsty they are thirsty

eda aamtna edaamt na abhiri aari edaamu na abhiri awo
abhiriam

Tam learning we are learning They are learning

minaarua aari wa arua awo wa aaru/ warua

CHAPTER IIT INYA EMU

SIMPLE AND SHORT STATEMENT EGUGURU DINE IKUDU AGBURU-OSI

agorom spoilt/it has gone bad'

ookpoa, agorom the sugarcane has gone bad.

aga agorom ni ‘spoilt egg’

abhubh ‘rotten’

ofoiny abhubh ni "arotten plantain’

ebhi sawered

ofilo a ebhi the soup is sawered

‘inuanyi' ‘It's finished’

‘akpar' ‘It's hard.’

‘obaisi' ‘It's bad.

‘Aziba ola’ ‘God exists./thereis God’

‘igbogi ba’ ‘there's no money’

'tié ta agi' ‘let's go!.'

‘adiaakpo' ‘the day is far gone.

‘épobh naastiam' ‘Tam hungry’

‘na abhiram'aséradu ‘I feellike sleeping’

‘adala na aastiam’' ‘I'm feeling sleepy’

"akpa omana daamini' ‘this bag is mine’

‘arébh'a ‘it's sweet.’

Arogh aten it's so sweet

‘édidim a’ ‘it's bitter’

‘aniénkedegiri' ‘who knows.’

‘6tuaazim' ‘the house is in darkness.’

‘mina abaimanol6gi' ‘Tam happy.’

"‘aw0 wa abaimanol6gi' ‘they are happy.

‘aarl wa abaimanologi' ‘we are happy.

‘mi abanaepere' ‘Thave joy.

‘obelogbagiria ke olaakei? Where is the frying pot?

ofoiny pe iberaamini ‘plantain is my favourite’

‘Owa mietara' my love/the one I love/my ruby

Obaimanologamini My joy

Owa miesa My desire/desire

Mina énobhora Iam sweating

Mina énobhora I'm over heated

waali atuo wa itékan both of them have divores

owédé dine 6hon Father and Mother

owéde amini dine 6hon amini My father and my mother

onobhiri dine onyan A boy andagirl

owéde amini dine adu onyimaolo My father and his little baby

ohon amini, dine onyima old my mother and her baby

34

--- PAGE 41 ---
owede amini,dine dowuégbdlom old My father and his car
onininuo dine oninorio za atim My siblings
o6hon amini dine 6owu old My mother and her canoe
onobhironyi ma dine akpim olo. The boy with his ball
onyanimor amini dine 6nobhirimor amini My sister and my brother
onyanonyi ma dine ontikpe old The girl with her headtie.
onébhironyi ma opa, adu atén That boy is fast asleep
onyanonyi mana aghalam This girl is praying
6kubh onyananaelo The young girl is laughing
anwiana za wa aaruu The girls will come
‘ini'/ kaka'itin all ofyou

kaka' atar ‘allofus'
kaka' atuo ‘all of them;
QUESTIONS: IPURAN Meaning(Atugu)
Nwu aart 0? Are you around?
‘erekiité/ éré/éria koopa ite a?’ ‘what happened?’
‘akéreifié?' ‘when?’
‘opa kééré?' ‘what's that ?'
‘anwu ka anion?’ ‘who are you ?'
‘da anion?’ ‘whoseisit?'
"éré?' ‘what ?'
‘in{?' ‘how many?’

ohon ana ke olakei? Where is your mother?
‘akere asi?’ ‘where?’
‘aleiaka?' ‘how much?'
‘ateiny da?’ ‘is ityour business?’
‘nwuiiruakere adio?' ‘what day did you come?’
nwu iiru akere okoko? ‘what time did you come?
nwuiiru ite akere okoko? ‘what time did you arrive?
‘nwu na agi akei?' ‘where are you going to ?'
‘Ola akéi?' ‘where is it?’
‘nwuikutiakei ?' ‘where did you keep it?’
‘nwueéniakéi ?' ‘where did you find it?'
‘anionkédigiri ?' ‘who know?’
‘obo 0'?' ‘is that so’?
obd ‘Itis so’
nwu na agi 0? ‘Are you going?
nwu na 6lo6 0? ‘Are you crying?
nwu na anweér elal 0? ‘Are you insane?
nwu haanwér elal 0? ‘Are you mad?
nwunaazeérian i1616 0? ‘Are you mad?
nwuaséradt 0? ‘Are you sleeping?
nwu naagam 0? ‘Are you work up?
nwuhaagam 0? Are you angry?
nwu enisi ési0? ‘Are you blind?
nwu daabao ‘Are you deaf?
nwu daakpam 0 ‘Are you dumb?
ému ana naagam 0? ‘Are you sick upstairs?
agbébh da 0? ‘Are you tired?
nwu ne epére? ‘Are you happy?
éria ‘whatis it?
éria ko opa naagamaman da? ‘whatis annoying you?

35

--- PAGE 42 ---
abai ke 6nébhiréni ‘what a handsome man
abai ke adiza ‘what a beautiful woman
nwu na akasibhar 0? Are you cooking
nwu ola akpar 0? are you healthy
nwualabh 0? are you rich?
nwu na aaru 0? are you coming?
nwu abaio are you beautiful?
omana ke anion whois this?
daanion ‘who owns it?
eno ke anion ‘who is she?
anion ke owaakenea ‘who did it?
anion ke 6wa abhia ‘who tookit?
anion ke owaiiyi a? ‘who stole it?
anion ke owa egé a? ‘who wrote it?
anion ke owaadea? ‘whoate it?
anion ke owa amu do? ‘who beat her up?
anion ke onobhirimor ana? ‘whois your brother?
anobhirimor ana ke anion? whois your brother?
anion ke owa awol eseiny za? who sold the prewincle
anion ke owa anye da ookpo a? who gave you the sugarcane
Adiri za ata ke ila akei? ‘where are your books?
akpa isukulu ana ke ola akei? ‘where is your school bag?
Agbebh da agiisukulu 0? ‘are you tired of going to school?
oniakene daagamaman hee? ‘has someone offended you?
nwt naagam 0? are you worked up?
za aweiakpiniziizena whose footballs are these?
QUESTIONS AND THE ANSWERS .......[PURAN DiNEIDUMOM ZA
Where are your children? They have gone to church
Anwi za ata ke ila akei? Waagiasosi
What are you doing? Iam bathing
Nwu naagiri éria. Minaawura
Whatare you doing? Iam drinking some water
Nwu naagiri éria. Minaabhto aamu
Who cut this rope? I did, cutthe rope
Anion ke 6wa asubh ami 0/ miisubh é6didiaodidi omana?
What are you doing? Tam urinating
Nwu naagiri éré/éria? Minanon
Is the girl coming Yes, she is
Onyana kina aarti héé Inyi, na aaru 6
Who farted? Mary farted
Anion ke owa eka? Amerieka
Who swept the house? Joshua swept the house
Anion ke owa 6wol 6tt a? Ajostia 6wol tua
Have you eating Yes, Ihave
Nwu adébhar Inyi, miade
Who gave it to you? My senior brother
anion ke owa anyé da? ogba 6nobhirimor amini
anion ke owa anyé da? ogba 6nobhirimor amini
whatare you writing? ‘letter’
nwu naege eria? eganalebh
whose letter is this? It's my sister's letter
eganalebh omana ke da anion? ‘da onyanimor amini

36

--- PAGE 43 ---
COMMANDS/EXCLAMATIONS OGBINI DINE EEGHA!
‘Sorry! /it's a pity!’ ‘dila!'
‘get well!’ ‘obt ana akpar 0!’
‘get well fast’ ‘obuana inugom akpar 6!
‘forgive me!’ ‘phieaténéman am!’
‘please!’ 'siséiny!'
‘please, forgive me!’ 'siséiny, bhieaténéman am!
‘forget it!’ ‘pasidién'/ bhasadien!
‘leave it!’ 'welé!'
‘t's ajoke/i'm only joking!’ mina 6lodla!'
‘all of you!’ ‘fini!
‘all of you!’ ‘kaka itin!'
‘don'ttouch me!’ kd6tiam!
‘jam sorry/iam guilty!’ ‘asulam!'
‘start now! 'soré eséna/didma eséna!’
‘come in!' ‘diéaarw!'
‘come back! ‘nwu ikitona aaru!'
‘don't go far! ‘koogi égbéiny!'
‘don'tcry!' 'kéold!
‘mind yourself!’ "bho 6bt ana!’
‘heaven forbid!’ ‘gufiakpa/aténikasor!
‘perhaps!’ ‘fbhésipe!'
{t's a big problem !' ‘obainyigi aagbolégi!’
‘itis true!’ ‘adegi!'
‘itis false!’ ‘jilu!’
‘it's okay/it's good./it's nice.!' ‘obebh, abaiola, abai atein!’
‘it's fine./it's lovely.!" ‘abai' abaia!
‘It's bad./ it's not good! ‘agorom/obaisi.!'
‘It's full!’ jizo!"
‘It's raining.!" ‘na ol6bh!:.'
It's too bad! Agoréma!
Its so bad! Agoromaten!
Absolutely bad!’ inomagorom aten!
Don't go anywhere! kogiesi!
Therain is falling! emadiana olobh!
The rain is threating to fall! emadia na aart olobh!
Itis raining seriously! na olobh oogba!
Go and take your bath! gié awura!
Did you take your bath? Nwu awura g6m?
I want to take my bath! mina aaruagiawura!
Have you taken a bath? nwu awura?
Sit down! toto!
Stand up! dua era!
Ilovemy mummy! miatar ohon amini!
Ilove my father! mi atar owédé amini!
like my toys! arara-olo za atim wa adiamologi!
This is my shoe! omana pe agbaka amini!
Iam going to school! mina agiisukulu/egela etire! oruabhar a!
Iam not going to school today!. Miegisi égéla etire oruabhar dadon
[like that girl.! onyan opa adiamologi!
There is time for every thing! kaka abhar abana okoko da olo!
‘Get out from that place’ tene aduiaesua ésiopa
‘my father' aada
Whatascene eeré
Whatasurprise/it’s so amazing eria
37

--- PAGE 44 ---
Leave it wele

Its disgusting fiyao

My owner obanamini

Iam notthe one isiami

Is that what happened /really obo

It's a pity indeed agura

Itis true adegi

owner obana

wow! Amazing. Wuulamalaamaaaaten.

Jamin danger mi oola Ologi agbologi

Iam finished miiwu

Iam lost miapu

Iam dead miiwu

Stop it nwuereteme

Leave me weleam

Leave me alone wele am aguo

God forbid Azibakoodua

Irejectit atenikamasor

Abomination! egola, Fiao!

SINGULAR ONINABHAR PLURALAPU ONIN ABHAR

onyan - girl girls anwinyana

oyel - boy boys iyel

onobhiri - man men inobhiri

adiza - woman women awar

otu - house houses itu

obaku - chair chairs ebaku

obele - pot pots ebele

ogia - knife knives egia

USAGE OF DETERMINANT 'THE' IN SINGULAR &PLURAL ARUOM ZA/ZA

thewoman adiza a awar Za the women

the boy oyela iyel za the boys

the house otu a itu. za the houses

the cloth ikpea ikpeza the clothes

the cup obuoa ebuo za the cups

theperson onuma anwunom za the people

PRESENT -ADON PAST-ELEGENA FUTURE-ELEGEN [EGELA EDIA]

Go __ gie gone _aagi will go------ _ naagii

Look-bh6é looked-aabho will look--- naabhoo

build -l6 - built- aalo will build--- naaloo

fight -wé fought-aawe will fight----naawee

cook-kase cooked-aakasi will cook--- na akasi

IKPOSI WORKS OPPOSITE -OGUANA

adiza - woman onobhiri - man

tie - come gie - go

abhen - fair azu - dark

kokode - gather sarage - scatter

ozuzu - black obabal - white

toto - sit down dua-era - stand up

onyan - girl oyel - boy

eelo - laugh oolo - cry
38

--- PAGE 45 ---
odiom - right ogiel - left
oyel - boy onyan - girl
awei - long akper - short
SHORT DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN TWO FRIENDS AT HOME
EKUDU ETEBELONU OGBESEDO WAALI EBHARANEDON OLOGI OTU
Knock' otuo!
Knock'knock' otu ‘otu 0!
Who is that? opa ke anion?
Itis I, Asela ami o, mi Aselao!
Asela, is ityou Aselalanwu 0?
Yes, itis I. inyi! ami o!
I took you for someone else. mi ibhi da na ikioma ka akeron
Please, comein. siseiny,die o/die aaru
wow! You look so good. Hum! nwu naabaiabho o!
it's been quite a while since we met. ala aari koozuan akpogom aghor!
Howare you Ba'ka /aka
Iam fine Mioola
Sitdown toto
Howare your siblings Imor za ata kee?
They are fine iila
Howis your father owede ana kee
Heis fine oola
Howis your mother ohon ana kee
She is also doing fine eno kpa oola obebaguo
Is your mother at home ohon ana oolaema
No, ba
Where is she eno ke oola kéi?
Has she travelled baemao?
Yes ,she travelled to Opume yesterday inyi, agi Opume elegena
When is she coming back? naikitona aaru akere okoko
Probably in three days time ibhosipe, na aaru amalegen
Help me with some water to drink. laguo anye am ekakaram aamu mi
taabhuo.
I have headache emu amininaagam
Iam hungry Epobh naasuam
What did you cook nwu ekasi éria
What type of food did you cook nwu ekasieriobu edia
Is the food finished edia za ke wa inuanyi héé?
I still have some in the pot awiziilala ologiobelea
Get me some food to eat nye am awizi edia za, mite ade
Do you have oil nwu abana amunu?
[like eating cocoyam with oil du mina abera abhiamunu ade okida
Oilis very costly these day abuaamunu naakpar esiadio zaizenaa
thankyou nwu agiri
Thank youso much nwuagiriaten
Let me see the pastor of our church mina aaru agi eni Okuér asosiaarar
Are you going alone anwu bene nwu naagi 0?
Are you coming with me nwunaadi ne ami agi ?
Yes inyi/inyo!
No héé héé
Please ,waitletmelockthe door siseiny, kode mita apikiegua
Young girl, come okubh onyana, tie
Young girl, come here! Okubh onyana, tie esena
Did you see your neighbour this nwu eeni owakpokpom ana
Morning? asuuta omana?
39

--- PAGE 46 ---
Yes, I did but, she went to greet her inyi,mieeni de,na agi awanan
Mother in - law. anwinini olo
Let's sit down and wait for her aaru ta atoto akodi do
Please, call my daughter for me. Siseiny, wa onyanonyimamini anyan
It belongs to you and! daanwu dine ami
It belongs to both ofus di waaliatar
What ere? /eria
Whatis it éria/ eriabhar
What are you doing nwu naakene eriabhar?
Whatare you really doing nwu ikpogom naakene kpa eria 0?
Doyou knowmy name nwu edigiri adien amini
My nameis Asela adienamini pe iwabe Asela.
Is ityours? da anahee?
Where are you? nwu oola akei?
It belongs to us diarar
Itis ours daarar
Dish the [solid] food Bole ediaza
Please, off the lantern ! Siseiny, dime atukpa
Please, lower the light! Siseiny, debhemane atukpa
Sweep the house nwu owole otu a.
Have you swept the house nwu Owole otu a?
They are coming awo wa aaru.
They are coming/Are the coming/They will come waaaru
The children are coming anwi za wa aaru
The boys are coming inobhiri anwi za wa aaru
Are you mad? /Are you insane nwu haanwer elal 6?
I'm waiting minaakéddi
Tam waiting for you mina akodi da.
Let me have that dust park nye am okpomeburu opa
You are so fast nwu inugian o!
The house is stinking Otua, naabhuru
I will leave you behind minaawele daagio
Lookat this lazy girl nwu eeni ekoromekor onyan omana
Your brother is waiting for you onobhirimor ana, na akodi dao.
Don't get offended koogam
Don'tsleep koodu
Don't be annoyed koogam
Don't get me offended koOgamaman am
Icansee you minaeenida
Ican'tsee you mienisidao!
Tam looking at you minaabho dao
Where is my food edia za atim Ke iila akei
You area fool anwu da egogoloo
You fool! egogola
Let love leads etaria aliebhhar apu
Love one another odion atar odion
Is ityours? daana?
Are you the owner of this cup anwu pe obana obu6 omana
Who owns this draft epeleaomanakida anion
Are you stupid? anwu de ég6g6l6 6?
You are stupid égogoloana
You are very stupid nwu egogolo aten
He behaves like a foolishman naakene akuo onobhiregég6lo
Iam tired agbebham
Are you not tired? diogbébh da 6?
40

--- PAGE 47 ---
I'm still around mioolala

Weare friend's aari ébhéranedon

That girlis my friend onyan opa pe ebharanedon amini

What are you cooking nwu na akasi ere?

Are youtired agebh dao?

Can I have the cooking spoon. nye am obaegiasi a

Help me with the cooking spoon Laguo anye am obe egidsia

Change your character nwu oguane ekéné za ata

The young boy saw his brother okubh oyela eeni onobhirimorolo

Ilike that cloth Ikpe opoa adiamoldgi

Are you coming back? nwunaikitona aaru

Goandsleep gie aseradu

Prepare yourself Kpogome obuana

The child came into the room onyima adi aaru ologiigula

The babies laughed at the children idabh za wa eel6 anwiza

Be careful bho obuana

Don'ttempt me Koodam abho

Whatis the name of your child? adienaonyimana ke fwaka

Am only joking mina oléoloa

Tam afraid minaayili

How do you mean anwu be éré?

Iam still searching minaasaasa

Iaccept mi ada abhi

Thanks nwu agiri

Thank you nwu agiri

Thank you very much nwu agiri aten

Are the Landlord of this house obana otu omana

The house is painted with ash colour ibhiadien eburu obilom otu a?

Mercy, has swept the house Amesi, 6ow6l 6tta

Don't be rude/arrogant Koode emu 6!

You are so rude/Arrogant nwu adé ému ateén!

Drop that cloth Sereinyeikpe opa

Call Beauty forme wa Abiuti anyeam

Ihave joy mina epere

Give me life nyeam awudum

Give me long life nye am owewei awudum

So that boke

So that the world will see boke adeda wa eeni

That you are God beanwunwua Aziba

That you area good God be anwu nwua obebi Aziba

Whatis this? omana ke eria

Marvelous God omaalamaala Aziba

Iam happy mina abaimanologi

Wake up nwuosuma

The bestis yet to come ibebh za waruarua

Believe me dumomeam

Believe in God dumome Aziba

Let me have that comb! nye am osalama opa

Who dropped the scissors hear? anion ke owa aasereiny
okpabhama esena?

See reasons with me die naamieni

The girl has no respect for elders onyan a obanasiiteneghoi anye egba
anwunom

Dish the soup for the children due ofiloaanye anwiza

A fool oni egogolo

A foolish, man égogologogolo onobhiri

Thatisa foolish man Opa, pe egogologogolo onobhiri

41

--- PAGE 48 ---
That fool! égogologogolo onumopa!
You area fool Anwu de egogolo
Isthatlamp yours Atukpa opaki daana héé?
Take the plates off the table. Kpoefereza aduoman obuedeodea
Open the door Nwuiguroneegu a
Close the door Nwuiguge egua
Put down the pot Nwu itene obele aasereiny
Wash your hands Totol aguozaata
Wash your legs Totol alike zaata
Wash your face Totol awisi ana
Whose shoes are these Agbaka zaizena ke zaanion
Wash your clothes Pueararazaata
Eat the food deediaza
Eat the fish/meat waena/waenama
They are ours zaatar
Those are our Izua za atar
They are theirs Izuazaatuo
These are theirs Izena za atuo
Iam going but Minaite
CHAPTERIV OWU EMU
AWIZI OSIAPE NA ADEGI- ENUOSI ZA
SOME COMMON DAILY ERRORS AND CORRECTIONS
patient?
[6 | lam noteatingagain | miiidemunude | miiidemunu
omana
[8 | Idon'tlikeit | miiberesi_ sf odisamélogi
[9 | Ican’t waitanylonger | miikodiside | miikodimunu
awa
food
aamu
42

--- PAGE 49 ---
37 They refuse to give it to | awo onye si awo awo iduasi anyé awo
7 ten PRES [Remeine pele
toilet
me
amini
43

--- PAGE 50 ---
ila Ail ncn
omana
mother
62 Come; let me show it to | tie, mi taolom da, tie, mi ta oloma da
a ae ee
il ideedalaeed ce aaa
[68 | Whatisyourname _adienanaeria | Adien na kefwaka
|69 | Whotoldyou | anionasi anyeda_———| anfonkoéwadsianyéda |
/80_|Theyaremany | waabutu sf adbiiny
to?
|86_ | Whogaveittoyou | anion anyeda_— | Anionkedwianyéda |
|89__ | Thewomenaretalking | awarzanaoduko _—|awarzawaddiko
/90__|Theyarefighting | awonaawe ss fawowadwe
alin nelineetll ~~ SO
ago rom/esdogbo r a agor om.
[98 | Theyaremany | waabutu sf adbtiny
44

--- PAGE 51 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
[amnot sound in health
toad evening al
The boy is jumping oyel a na apelekian oyéla na apél ,
Can I have it?
112 | Are you still passing nwu nainon de nwu na in oninona hée
urine?
I have finished the food
114 |I want to visit the m1 na agi aati mi na agi ighdi ny
ladies /men
Let me have it
117. |1 am eating roasted minaa de abole minaa dé ebhuga na oféiny
plantain
Is this your brother
119 | The boy and the girl are oyelan e onyana na aaru oyélane onyana wa aaru
coming
120 | The woman | am living adizamina aarona eno a. | adizaminaa diaaroa
with
126 | Let me see them off mi na aaru agi asereiny | minadaru abhi awo adonéman
awo
| am seeing them off
What is that
[am washing
45

--- PAGE 52 ---
You have spoilt this cup nwu agoroman obo a omana
I did not spoil those food mi igoromansié diaza izua

I am chewing sugar cane Mina arardokp 0

Are you no longer going nwu egimunuh éé?

I have not slept mi bil6 séradu

140 | The money is dropping Igbogi a, na owolokian na | Igbogia, owolna itédlogi akpa

out of the bag, {té ologia akpa.
141 | please, buy me siseinyi, ghoam apapa siseinyigho apapa anye am
eroundnut

please , help me siseinyl anyam aguo siseiny,| aguo anye am

what will I do mij ekéne érfa

mina elé

Orusi olobh akuotaolobhb_a
diomaam/_diomam

Nwu ituga atuanam

Agebh am

mina gar

150 | Drop thes mall potforme | sereinye ekaram o beka | Sereinye aduobelea anyeam

anyam
FEW POEMS wadikpu apoemu

A FOOL EGOGOLOGOGOLO ON

Hewhoknows not Qnura opakee digiibhar a

But knows not Dikee digin be, enoe digiisia
That he knows not, isa fool Pe ,egpgologogolo = oni

PARTS OF MY BODY EIZAO BUAMN

Myhead ny shoulders, myyknees, Emu , oblaguo , Ekpolomn e

Mytoes. 3X ekpusalaalike za atim3X
Theyall belong to Jesus Kaka atuozaAjiz os.

46

--- PAGE 53 ---
JESUS LOVES ME AJISOS ATARAM
Jesus loves me this I know Ajisos ataram, mi edigiri
For the bible tells me so Adiri egola asiobo anye am
Little ones to him belong Adu anwi za pi za oto
They are weak, but he is strong Awo wa aguru, de eno pe akpar
Chorus: yes, Jesus loves me Chorus: Inyi, Ajizos ataram
Yes, Jesus loves me Inyi , Ajizos ataram
Yes, Jesus loves me Inyi ,Ajizos ataram
The bible tells me so Adiri egola asiobo anye am
MOTOR CAR OOWUEGBOLOM
Motor car, motor car Oowuegbolom , oowuegblom
Little nursery motor car Oowuegbolom da adu anwi
If you want to go to school Nwu na aaru agi agela otuoruabhara a
O! Please carry me O, siseiny sainye am
Pi, pi, pi, po, po, po pi, pi, pi, pd, po, po,
Little nursery motor car Oowuegbolom da adu anwi
CATCHING FISHES ALL ALIVE AGIOU INA EERONI IMOM
One, two, three, four, five Onin, waaili, saari, inya, owu
Once I caught a fish alive Agiou ina eeroni imom
Six, seven, eight, nine, ten Odin, odual, inyan, isio, diobh
Then I let them go away Bene mi awele awo agi
Why did you let them go? Ekene aka ku nwu awele awo agi
Because they bite my finger so, Atugu a pe awo wa anom ekpasala aguo
Which finger did they bite? amini
The little finger on the right kere ekpasala aguo a ke opa awo inom a
Adu ekpasala opa odiom aguo a.
PAWPAW IS A KIND OF FRUIT AGUREBEKE PE ADIEN IMUMUA OREN
Pawpaw is a kind of fruit agurebeke pe adien imumua oren
La la lala La la la la,
Sweet like sugar, Arobh akuo osigiri.
Yellow like fanta Adien abeke akuo afanta
Every body like pawpaw agurebeke adiologi kaka’oni
Pawpaw AGUREBEKE
ONCEI SAW A LITTLE BIRD ODI OKOKO MI EENI ADU ENURU
Once I saw a little bird, Odi okoko mi eeni adu enuru
Coming hop, hop, hop, Na abhulu na aaru, na aaru, na aaru
So I cried, little bird, Bene mi okokian, adu enuru
Will you stop, stop, stop Nwu ereteme, nwu ereteme, nwu ereteme,
I was going to the window to say, Mi na agi agela opolebebeiny asibe,
How do you do Nwu eto akene aka,
But it shook its little tail, Bene, eno azige adu ikpikolom olo,
And away it flew, 2x Bene eno abhulu adua 2x
47

--- PAGE 54 ---
One, two Onin. waali
Buckle my shoe Zine agbaka za atim
Three, four Saari, inya
Knock at the door Kpukpe egu a
Five ,six Owu ,odin
Pick up sticks Sa iren za
Seven, eight Odual, inyan
Lay them straight Selemane iren za
Nine ,ten Isio ,diobh
A big fat hen Ob adiza enuru
Eleven, twelve Diobh ne onin, diobh ne waali
Go to bed Gie aseradu
Thirteen, fourteen Diobh ne saari, diobh ne inya
Shoot your gun Teinye avaana
Po po po po po po Kpo! Kpo!! Kpo!!! Kpo Kpo Kpo!!!!!
RAIN’ RAIN EMADIO EMADIO
Rain rain go away Emadio emadio tene adua
Come again another day Nwu ikitona aaru akere adio
Little children want to play Aduanwi wa aaru oloolo
YAM PORRIDGE ELEL
Yam porridge hot Elel za iizu ni,
Yam cool Elel za ebo ni,
Yam porridge in the pot Elel za ologi obele a,
Nine days old Za isio adio.
Some like it hot Awizi anwunom ibere izuzu,
Some like it cool Awizi abera za ebo ni
Some like it in the pot Awizi ibera 6logi obele
Nine days old Za isio adio
I LOVE JESUS MI ATAR AJISOS
I love Jesus 2x mi atar Ajisos 2x
He’s my friend 2x eno pe ebharanedon amini 2x
I will never leave him 2x mi inesi awele do 2x
He’s my friend 2x eno pe ebharanedon amini 2x
I LOVE MY JESUS MI ATAR AJISOS AMINI
I love my Jesus mi atar Ajisos amini
My Jesus loves me Ajisos amini kpa ataram
No circumstances Abhar ta oguan ology amini ba
Can changes my decision
48

--- PAGE 55 ---
Ogbia Grammar Book for Beginners....
GLOSSARY ASIKIRE-ARARA
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE GOVERNANCE OF OGBIA
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AREA.
Ogbia Town was established in 1972 by Late Chief Senator Melford Okilo with the aim of
decentralizing power or authority from a central authority to local or regional levels so as
to promote autonomy, efficiency and participation in governance or systems. Ogbia Local
Government Area, with Ogbia Town as the headquaters, was carved out of the old Brass
Local Government Area, comprising of Brass, Nembe, and Ogbia, on Sept. 23, 1991, by the
former Head of State, General Ibrahim Badamasi Babagida, in the then old Rivers State.
During this period, the Governor of the old Rivers State, Nigeria who served as the Military
Administrator from August 1990 to January 1992, was Colonel Godwin Osagie Abbe.
Below are the names, period, type of administrative head, and their communities.
NAME OF CHAIRMAN/SOLE ADM. PERIOD |REMARKS  —_| TOWN
LATE CHIEF (AMB). ERIC. TONYE 23/9/91- SOLE ADMINISTRATOR
AWORABHI 2/12/91
HON. NAPOLEON OFURUMA 2/12/1991- EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
1993 oct.
LATE (SIR)DR. WILCOX JONAH Oct. 1993-1994 | C.T.C. CHAIRMAN
ETELI.
DAME(MRS). LOVE .I. 1994-1996 SOLE ADMINISTRATOR
AMASEIMOGHA April
LATE ENGR. D.M. ABARA April 1996 EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN | Oloibiri si
HON. LOVEDAY EMINAH April 1996- ACTING CHAIRMAN
27/3/97
LATE ENGR.I.D. REX OGBUKU 27/3/97- EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
28/7/98
MR. 0.J. OWORIBO 28|7|98-9|4|99 | SOLE ADM/ C.T.C. CHAIRMAN
LATE HON. ETO GEORGE OKIRINYA | 9/4/99- Jan, EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Emeyal II
2000
LATE HON. SYLVANUS EGELE Jan. 2000-Oct. | ACTING CHAIRMAN Otuabula I
2000
HON. MENIDIN ETUERE Oct. 2000- ACTING CHAIRMAN
11/6/2001
MR. T.E.C MEINDINYO 11]6|2001- D.P.M/ACTING CHAIRMAN
2|12|2002
LATE(BARR). K.W. OPUKUMO 2|12|2002- T.M.C CHAIRMAN
23|6|03
HON. (CHIEF)MITEMA OBORDOR 25|6|03- C.T.C. CHAIRMAN
19]2|04
CHIEF M.C.l AMANGALA 19]2|04- SOLE ADMINISTRATOR — |
02|04|05
CHIEF M.C.1 AMANGALA 19}2]|04- SOLE ADMINISTRATOR —
02|04/05
HON. MITEMA OBORDOR 03|4/05-2006 EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Abobiri
HON. (CHIEF)INNOCENT KAKU 2006-5]4|07 EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Ibelebiri
CHIEF S.M. ALAFA 5|4|07- D.P.M/ACTING CHAIRMAN
16]10|07
LATE HON. SAMUEL BOY 16]10}07- C.T.M. CHAIRMAN
14|10)08
MR. JUSTICE .T. BELLO 15]10)08- H.L.G.A/ ACTING CHAIRMAN
21}11|08
DAME(MRS). SERAFINAH OTAZI 21|11)08- C.T.C. CHAIRMAN — |
30|10|09
49

--- PAGE 56 ---
MR. JUSTICE .T. BELLO 30]10)09- H.L.G.A/ ACTING CHAIRMAN

14|11]09
CHIEF OKPU AUGUSTINE.N. 14]11|09- T.M.C CHAIRMAN

4/410
LATE(HON). SAMUEL BOY 4/4|10-5|7|12 | EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
HON. RICHARD IBEGU 5|7|12-5/4/13 | EX-CHAIRMAN |Oloibiri
HON. ENAYE ABAH 5|4|13-16/ EXET. CHAIRMAN

2017

HON.(CHIEF) EBIANGO OKOBA 2017|2018 ACTING CHAIRMAN
EGAIN
HON. NAOMI BENJAMIN OGOLI 2018 ACTING CHAIRMAN Ibelibiri
HON. (DR)EBINYO MARVIN 2018- ACTING CHAIRMAN
TURNER 15/7/2019
MR. NDIOMU B. A. 15/7/2019- T. MC CHAIRMAN
HON.(DR) EBINYO MARVIN 15|8|2019- EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Opume
TURNER 15]9|2023
HON(CHIEF) MUZODOME IBU 15]9|2023- CARETAKER Emeyal ll

6|5|2024
HON. JEREMIAH GOLDEN 06|5|2024 till | EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Emadike

DATE
Other Ogbia sons who have served as Executive Chairman, and on Acting capacity in the
old Brass Local Government Area of the old Rivers State are as follows;
1. HONOURABLE OLALI OPUENE JR OKODI ANYAMA
2. BARR. CHRISTIAN OKOLOBA AZIBA OPUME OLOIBIRI
3. LATE HON. THOMAS ORUAMA AYAKORO ANYAMA
4, LATE BARR. CLEVER IDUMESARO OTUABAGI OLOIBIRI
5. LATE DR, LORD JONES AMASEIMOGHA OPUME OLOIBIRI
6. LATE EDWARD OWUDOGU IMIRINGI KOLOCREEK
7. LATE CHIEF DRESSMAN AKEKERE OPUME OLOIBIRI
SOURCE ; JEREMAIH TONI JEREMAIH

CLERK OF THE HOUSE
OGBIA LGA'2025'
50

--- PAGE 57 ---
COUNTING NUMBERS FROM 1-1050
AWAL ONIN AGI ITTE ODE NE DIABHAR
1 2 3 4 5 6
Onin waali Saari Inya owu Odin
7 8 9 10 11 12
odual inyan Isio Diobh Diobhne | Diobhne
onin waali
13 14 15 16 17 18
Diobh ne | Diobhne Diobh ne Diobh ne Diobh ne | Diobhne
Saari inya owu odin odual inyan
19 20 21 22 23 24
Diobhne | Subh/pu Subh ne Subh ne Subh ne Subh ne
isio onin/pune | waali/pu saari inya
onin ne saari
25 26 27 28 29 30
Subh ne Subh ne Subh ne Subh ne Subh ne_ | odabhar/
owu odin odual inyan isio pune
diobh
31 32 33 34 35 36
odabhar odabhar | odabhar ne | odabhar ne | odabharne| odabhar
ne ne saari inya owu ne odin
onin/pu | waali/pu
ne diobh | nediobh
ne onin ne waali
37 38 39 40 41 42
odabhar odabhar | odabharne| Waalipu | Waalipune| Waalipu
ne odual | neinyan isio onin ne waali
43 44 45 46 47 48
Waalipu | Waalipu | Waalipu ne | Waalipu ne | Waalipu ne | Waalipu
ne saari | ne inya owu odin odual ne inyan
49 50 51 52 53 54
Waalipu | diabhar/ | diabharne | diabharne | diabharne | diabhar
neisio | waalipune onin waali Saari ne inya
diobh
55 56 57 58 59 60
diabhar | diabharne | diabhar ne| diabharne | diabharne | _ saaripu
ne owu odin odual inyan isio
51

--- PAGE 58 ---
61 62 63 64 65 66
Saaripu | saaripune | saaripune | saaripune | saaripune | saaripu ne
ne onin waali saarl inya owu odin

67 68 69 70 71 72
Saaripu | saaripune | saaripune | saaripune | saaripu ne | saaripu ne
ne odual inyan isio diobh diobhne | diobhne

onin waali

73 74 75 76 77 78
Saaripu | saaripune | saaripune | saaripune | saaripune | saaripu ne

nediobh | diobhne diobh ne diobhne | diobhne diobh ne
ne saari inya owu odin odual inyan

79 80 81 82 83 84
saaripu inyipu inyipu ne | inyipune inyipune | inyipu ne

ne diobh onin waali Saari inya
ne isio

85 86 87 88 89 90

inyipune | inyipune | inyipune inyipu ne inyipune | inyipu ne
owu odin odual inyan isio diobh
91 92 93 94 95 96
inyipu ne | inyipune | inyipune inyipu ne inyipune | inyipu ne
diobh ne | diobhne diobh ne diobh ne diobh ne diobh ne
onin waali Saari inya owu odin
97 98 99 100 200 300
inyipu ne | inyipu ne | inyipone | owupu/opo | waali opo saari
diobh ne | diobhne diobh ne opo
odual inyan isio
400 500 600 700 odual | 800 900
inyaopo | owuopo odin opo opo inyan opo | isio
owupu /isi
oO OpOo
1000 1010 ode | 1020 ode | 1030 ode 1040 ode 1050 ode
ode ne diobh ne waali ne saari ne inya ne owu
diobh/ode | diobh/ ode | diobh/ode | diobh/
ne subh nesubh ne | ne waalipu | ode ne
diobh waalipu
ne diobh
52

--- PAGE 59 ---
OPSALM 23-Asuor a te Adevidi (Qbana Pe Owa Na Agbalenam za )
Obanaa, pe, owa na agbalenam za.
Abhar taodoam ba
Eno asam aalo esi de eghogho eeroni nyiu.
Eno adonoman am, aka-obhi aamu eeliani;
Eno anye emi, emubh amini.
Eno adonoman am, obu adegi eso za adi adien glo
Miadon aka, aten ologi apua, de ozim aaroni kanam,
Mietetasi okarabh;
Opape nwu oola dine ami;
Ekudu okuror ana,dine osusu ana, wa abem am.
Nwu akpogom ede-ode esuo awusi amini,
Esuoigu ekpukpu za atim eero a;
Bene obuo amini, iizo na aduduga.
Adegi, obebi abhar dine obetaria, wa abharan am,
kaka adio zaawudum amini,
Bene mita asoreror, ologi otua te Obanaa,
Tutu ne odudul.Asuobo-ite
THE TEN COMMANDMENT DIOBH EZO ZA
1. Ini kobana iruru esuo awusi amini. Ini kobobol adienadien arara anye ibuzitin,
aaroni ke abhar de oka aagubanini abhar de aaroni agela anyu oboba de aaroni obu
ade a, oboba de aaroni ologi aamua, ode adea.
2. nikikpudiam abhiikodizaitin akan agela ade Iruru, oboba agiranye awo.
3. Inikoruom adienate Obanaa Aziba inin, akuo kobai
4. Ikiomawateiny asabata, bene waagola.
5. Ibomane ewede za itin, dine ihon zaitin, boke adio zaitin wa abuiny, ologiegboloma
opa Obanaa, Azibainin na anye dina.”
6. Kebasiaagi oni
7. Koseregi oseregi.
8. Kiiyiaabi.
9. koodionyoba kobai, agba ogbonoma owakpokpom ana.
10.Kobana okarabh ibera, anye owakpokpom ana; kobana okarabh ibera anye adiza-ilom
a owakpokpom ana, oboba inobhiri, oboba adiza ogon, oboba ovi, oboba enamibana, oboba
abharinabhari de owakpokpom ana aabanani.”
OURLORD'S PRAYER .........EGHALAM AQWEDE ARAR
Owedearar, owa aaro agela anyu
Itutuman ateiny adien ana
adema ana aaru
Eto za ata agana ade,
aaro akuo eero egela anyu
Nyeaari ediazaizuaaadon
bhi ekarabh za atar, ateneman aari,
akuo aari wabhiateneman
igu za wakene okarabh agbolomaaaria
Kodonoman aariadiom ologi oda-abho
de saaariitene , ologiokenokarabh
Opape adema, daanake
Ekpara,'n'itutumana
Tutu ne odudul,
Asuobo-ite
53

--- PAGE 60 ---
GLORIA - ITUTUMAN
Itutuman ateiny owedea,
Ne onyima, ne obebiemtbha
Akuo aaro esuo opurua,
Esena, kpa bi naaroo obo
Tutu nodudul, Asuobo-ite
THE GRACE....OBOBHARIER A
Obobharier owebhela Ajizos Akirasit,
neluan ate Aziba, dine odionin opa obebi atamara
Aaro ne aari esena, tutu no 6dudul
Asuobo- ite.
54